Benjamin sent me homework last night to read one of your articles and I may actually do a podcast
based on the article at some point. Which one was that? Which one is it, Benjamin? It's your
five flaws with liberal philosophy. Oh, the false assumptions, yeah. Yes, the five false
assumptions. I think that's a very important piece, honestly. So, yeah. I'm working on a follow-up
today, actually, because I've identified at least four more false assumptions in liberalism,
which, unfortunately, it's one of the problems of it. It's just it's
kind of irreconcilable for the philosophy and I'm not happy to say that, you know.
Right. Yeah, I mean, I think about these things a lot because this was
a philosophy that was hashed out over 200 years ago when, I mean, we're getting a lot of trouble
for saying this because there's a lot of old wisdom and things, but frankly, people didn't
know what the hell was going on. And liberalism falls out of the enlightenment and the enlightenment
is this sprawling, messy kind of quest of discovery and, you know, the scientific,
the dawning of the scientific revolution is kind of beginning, but science doesn't mature until the
early 20th century, certainly until at least electromagnetism is tamed, which is early 20th
century. Quantum mechanics throws a wrench into the whole thing later, but you have this kind of
unfolding of ideas where people are making sort of stabs in the dark and there's this kind of,
I don't know, almost miasma of deep philosophical thought mixed in with literal mysticism mixed
in with religion and trying to cut apart from these things all at once, where people, again,
I mean, like, you know, with the Five False Assumptions essay that you wrote, you talk again
and again about this root of this kind of being in this image of the state of nature,
which is, of course, just crap. No such thing ever existed. No such thing applies whatsoever,
again. A bunch of them admit that it's probably not true as well. Right, which is even funnier.
Yeah, why base anything on something you probably think is not true? Why do that?
Because humans, I mean, what do you mean exactly? But yeah, it's just fantastic
to look at this, because my opinion, and maybe you agree with me, and maybe you don't agree with me,
and maybe you hope I'm right, is that there is, if we might lift language from Karl Marx,
just for the hell of it, that there is a rational kernel in this mystical shell that can be pulled
out and updated for the 21st century. I think that these assumptions poke at something true
and valuable. I know that you have identified yourself, and I identify myself as classically
liberal in many regards. I don't know if that still holds for you for sure, but with your
your desire not for those, those things should not be the case over there. I feel like there's
a post liberal at this point. It's not that I don't owe anything to the legacy of liberalism.
I feel that it's time to figure out what was true and what was not, and then what to keep and what
to lose. So in that sense, I don't know that our project is wholly different, except that what I
would rather do is put the truth of those insights that are based on incorrect assumptions on
firmer ground and update them for the 21st century and the circumstances we find ourselves in.
That's something we can definitely discuss. Definitely something we can discuss.
Where would one begin? Because both of you guys have attacked very thoroughly in your own ways,
progressivism, and then moving on to, as both of you, I've watched you guys develop your critiques.
You go deeper and deeper and deeper. And so where do we start after if we just say, okay,
we know that something's wrong. Society is fragmenting at the same time, power is congealing
in a way that doesn't seem to be good. And we want to have some sort of philosophy or some
sort of philosophical grounding from which to proceed towards organizing society.
So I'm seeing the situation that we're in. And then you and I spoke about this, I think after
we ended the stream last time, Benjamin, where we talked about the idea of what we're dealing with,
whether we call it communism or neo-communism or Marxism or this kind of legacy of Marxism or
woke or the kind of weird fascist thing that they built at the World Economic Forum in the United
Nations out of all of this and are applying it to us. I called it a parasite, a liberal parasite.
And I think that a lot of the post-liberal movement thinks that this is the culmination
of liberalism, whereas I think it is a parasite that has taken, that has slashed onto the side
of liberal philosophy and societal organization and has basically taken control of the ship.
It's like that beetle that went viral the other day with the parasites. It has no body left.
It's just the outer carapace of the beetle walking around literally like a janky beetle,
but there's no bot. The thing's not even just dead. It doesn't even have a body anymore. It's
been eaten literally apart from the inside. And I feel like that we have a parasite on liberalism
rather than a coming to fruit of what liberalism was always intended or likely to go to. And so
when I think about that, to switch metaphors, which I know is always a dangerous thing to do,
maybe more of like a garden, when does your garden get taken over by weeds? It doesn't get
taken over by weeds when the plant life, for example, is healthy and well-tended. And so that's
kind of, in my opinion, getting this basic philosophy right. If we want to get our basic
substrate to where it excludes the possibility of the parasite being able to latch on, but the
problem is the parasite's already latched on. Its fangs are deep, deep inside. It's already drained
most of the blood out of society. It's drinking what it can now very quickly of what's left.
And so we actually also have to kill the parasite. So what I see is we've got this
weird techno transhumanist future awful thing happening, being foisted on us by the exploitation
of being able to get around the kind of liberal government principles by using the corporate
sector to circumvent most of the protections that are supposed to be there. So we get this kind of
monstrosity. That has to be destroyed. I think that every sane person who wants freedom in the
future, whether we're liberal, conservative, post-liberal, whatever has to just focus on destroying
that, which includes the woke ideology. But we also have to figure out how to get this
fundamental philosophical substrate right in order to make sure that we don't easily get
reinfected. Or in fact, I hear a lot about creating parallel structures, parallel economy,
parallel this, parallel that. I think that that's interesting and a bit
ambitious and in a kind of fake way. But at the same time, how do you prevent such a thing from
being immediately co-opted by the parasite? And that becomes the question. Like I'm looking at
this school choice movement thing happening in the United States. And I'm just like,
you guys have done literally zero of the groundwork. This whole thing is going to be a woke
disaster in three years. The whole thing. Because you've done none of the groundwork to prevent
your alternative structure from getting taken over from the inside. This is a mistake the
reactionaries have made throughout the world. The integralist movement in South America made
this. They created all these powerful structures. They got their little helicopters. They got rid
of the communists. Everybody clapped and now look at South America. The whole place is going
communist full blast and using the apparatuses that they created in order to oppress people.
It doesn't work. It's not just making a parallel, but we have to also get the philosophy right.
And it has to be the philosophy updated in terms of what we've learned. So these five
false assumptions or the nine I guess now that Carl has identified of liberalism have to be
addressed. Those problems have to be identified and addressed. The philosophy has to be clarified
and updated. We have to figure out what liberalism actually was intending to achieve. Therefore,
clear it up and then at the same time destroy this beast. I mean, I use that in the biblical sense.
This beast that's consuming freedom and humanity. Not even civilization. Screwed civilization.
It's consuming humanity and it has to be stopped. So these are the things that I see as our big
project. But we've got to also get the philosophy right. The cultural renewal underneath the cause
of whatever human liberty looks like in the 21st century has to speak into not just what
we've learned that shows these nine errors, but what we also know and what we're dealing with,
the tech sector. The idea of a kind of literal ethereal world that we semi-live in through the
internet. Space and time are actually different. We don't need the queer theorists with their queer
space and time being the only people speaking into that. Are you suggesting that we create a
state of nature thought experiment for the internet? A state of virtuality?
Yeah, no. Absolutely not. Absolutely not.
Carl, what's your response to that? Or where would you like to focus on?
I think I actually do disagree with James on this. Sorry, James. I hate to be a
apologetic to disagree with me. I've got my anti-science aggression mug here for this.
I'm ready. Oh, good. Yes, because I'm the leading anti-science activist.
I think this probably was an inherent aspect of liberalism. It seems to be the enlightenment
itself is a movement dedicated to the supremacy of reason. That seems like a rational thing to have
in the 17th century when everyone is incredibly prejudiced, things are bad,
people are suffering all the time, and the human condition is far worse than what we have now.
But the thing is, I've come to the conclusion that ideas are a product of the time and place.
They don't just exist in the ether to be accessed at any point. They are a product of the human
experience, and we are living in a very different world now after 300 years of this supremacy of
reason. So much good has been done that we are forgetting, we have forgotten what good can be
done through ways of life that are not based on reason. In fact, much of our daily life is not
really based in reason. Most of it is based in habit, in custom, in prejudice. I don't mean
prejudice in the way that the left would use it to describe bigotry, but the accrued wisdom of
habits is really what we mean by prejudice. We don't necessarily know. For example, I'm not
vaccinated. I don't know anything about vaccines, but I thought I would just be prudent on this and
not jump like everyone else. And learn, behold, I'm not worried about having a random heart attack.
It wasn't because I had any special knowledge or wisdom or insight. It was because
long, long experience has taught me that when everyone is moving in one direction and you're
not allowed to criticize or challenge that, there's something, there's something you need to know
about this. And that wasn't a product of reason. That was a product of my prejudice. And so it's
not that these things aren't valuable. It's not that they don't contain knowledge and wisdom,
and it's not that they aren't helpful. The problem is that prior to the enlightenment,
that was the dominant paradigm. And it was oppressive. And it was maintaining social orders
that people understood, rightly understood, to be intolerable and should have changed. And it's
good that they did. But I think that the pendulum has swung too far now. And it's normal and natural
for people who are committed to reason to stigmatize things like prejudices, things like
unthinking habits, biases. It's normal for them to do that, because that's what's in the way of
them achieving what they're trying to attain. But the problem, I think, that lies at the very root
of the enlightenment itself is it can't really stop itself from the way it is constituted in its
origins, from admitting that the ultimate goal of the enlightenment is to free the will from the
body. Because ultimately, it is the physical necessity of being a human being that will forever
be inhibiting what the will is. And there's a massive conversation to go into about the
kind of circular nature of this as well. But I'll try and sidestep that just to save time.
We see this, as James points out, very, very honestly. This was probably, I think, one of the
insights, James, where I was watching one of your podcasts, and it just clicked for me,
if you'd described them as a Gnostic cult, and I was, you know, that is exactly right. Because I
read about Gnosticism when I was studying the Cathars. And I'd never made the connection before,
and you would spot on. But that's exactly the problem, isn't it? It's the stigmatization of the
material world that is the issue. And then I watched a podcast that Michael Knowles did with a
science-based medical student. And he just drilled it down at the end to her saying, well,
he was like, well, this is your body, then what's you? And she's like, well, it's my soul. So,
oh my God, okay. So now we have arrived at the Gnostic position, where the soul proceeds the body.
Now, I'm an atheist. So I don't believe that at all. I believe that the mind is a product of the
body. And in fact, the mind is not separate from the body. It is a part of the body. And so,
I think this is where we can properly begin to see where the Enlightenment actually has this
fundamental flaw in it. And how we can begin, like I said to James just before we started,
I consider myself these days sort of a post-liberal. My instincts are, of course,
as they've always been, and I'm still very classically liberal in what I would choose for
myself. But as I noted in those articles, there are false assumptions that liberalism is built on.
And if you are forced to build an intellectual foundation that is consistent and accurate to
reality, which not everyone is, I mean, you could have a mythological foundation,
which lots of people do. And that's not necessarily bad either. That's another conversation.
Then we have to ascertain what the real situation was, and as you pointed out, James,
they were doing their best 300 years ago. But of course, there's just so much more that we know
now, thanks to the use of reason. So the core thing for me is to actually stitch back together
reason and our physical bodies. This is something I think actually needs to happen.
In tradition too.
Well, that's the point. Almost everything physical you do is kind of a tradition. It's
kind of part of a tradition. You get up every morning and you get your breakfast and you
don't think, well, you can have breakfast. What do I feel like? And on a Thursday,
you might feel like a fry up or something. I don't know. But you make your breakfast,
you don't really think about it. It's just something you do. And this is the habitual
patterns of life. This is most of what we do. And it's okay that that is unreasoned. It's okay
that most of our life is actually kind of impulsive, as Jonathan Heitzwerk has gone through,
and we've known as far back as human. Actually, most of what we do isn't
rationalized. Most of what we do is post hoc rationalization for what we've just done,
because habitually, we've always done it. And so the remarriage of these things
is an important thing. But what I think that does is actually to destroy the concept of ideology
itself. And that's a problem for ideologists. And ideologists are mostly, as far as I can tell,
a product of the Enlightenment. I think you could make an argument that Islam is a form of
political ideology that came obviously long before. But what do you mean by ideology? Like a
ruling co-herit? So there are lots of definitions of ideology, and no one seems to be able to nail
them down. But a few that I've been working with, one of them comes from critical race theory,
actually, which is a set of contested ideas. And the second one is from Oak Shots, where it's
the distillation and abstraction of a political tradition that is used in order to justify the
seizure of power. And actually, I think that one, combined with the other one, but that one is the
most accurate because an ideology is essentially programming code for political NPCs, for midwits,
to tell them, oh, no, if you do this, this, and this, you should get X or Y result. And now,
I mean, we know that this just generally isn't true for most ideologies, because the world is
horrifically complex. But it is the retreat out of, I should say the advance out of this
scholarly place into a more real place, where we're approaching the sort of more Edmund
Burkean position of, yes, I'm a wig, yes, I'm all these things. But I also think the traditions are
important. To kind of marry these things back together, I think is actually the job of post-liberals,
because we don't want to lose the good things that liberalism provided to us. But we also don't
want those things weaponized against us. And when you're existing purely in the world of theory,
actually, that's entirely possible, as James and I have both spent a lot of time explaining through
critical race theory. It's actually an attack on the liberal view of civil rights that birthed
critical race theory and has allowed it to prosper, because the parasite itself knows how we work.
And so it can do these things. And so we want to retain the good things that we
achieved without opening the door to radical extremism, like the critical race,
critical race theorists. And we also want to rehabilitate the authentically human dimensions
of being a human. Because one of the problems of reason is that we're looking at AI at the moment,
saying, okay, well, it's only a matter of time until this is effectively human, as far as we
can tell, because it's capable of reason. But I think that's the wrong way of looking at it,
because the constituency then, if it's a rational being, well, a lot of things could end up being
rational, but only one type of thing is a human. And that's the thing I think we need to be concerned
about, because we are all humans. And the human experience is very rich and very complicated.
And I think that we need to bring these things back together. And that means we need to, I think,
have a more sentimental view of ourselves, each other, and the sort of connective tissue between
each people, each person, that is the relationship that they have with one another, with the place
around them, with their own civilization, with their country, that any metaphysics that they
happen to hold. That I think is what needs to really be thought about, rather than trying to
continue on the path of ideology in order to try and defeat the woke virus. I mean,
I agree it needs to be defeated. But I think, actually, it's kind of a more advanced technology
in that regard. And so it'd be like trying to win the American Civil War with bows and arrows,
rather than rifles. I don't think you can do it. So I'll leave that there.
But a sentimental connection to each other can just as easily slip into a ideology or a formula
for acquiring political will, which is not necessarily bad, because we need to have some
sort of political will to protect society and some sort of unification within that.
But you see from the left, or at least from the elite, that any sort of disturbance of
a American nationalism freaks them out, or they continually prop it up as controlled opposition.
So just to make a point there, the problem with an ideology is defined a priori
from a position that is not interested in what the world is like. And so it describes what it
wants in an idealistic way, and then tries to format the world to fit that. The difference
between that and this sentimental view of politics would be to take things as they are
and try and imagine a slightly better future, rather than reformat the entire world. So you
are localizing the issue that you're trying to change, rather than universalizing it, which is,
I think, the inherent problem with ideologies. Because you're starting in the realm of the
abstract and then coming into the real, rather than coming into the real, and then trying to
look slightly ahead. It works in different directions.
So on the topic of ideology, just to kind of put it out there, and maybe this will help you
since you're working on a project with it, Carl. I don't know if you've ever read,
you mentioned critical race theory. I don't know if you've ever read this book called,
what's it called, From Class to Race by Charles Mills.
And so the first chapter, I hesitated to read this thing forever, and I finally sucked it up
and read it. And the first chapter actually is Charles Mills, who's a very, he recently died,
like last year or something, or the year before. He's a very famous, I've been told I'm not
allowed to call him a critical race theorist, because he's a critical philosopher of race,
and we can all go off in our leftist circles and jerk around or whatever we do in them.
But anyway, the first chapter, he basically lays out literally a claim that everybody who's
a Marxist ever misunderstood Marx about ideology. And he gives the most cogent explanation of what
it is that I think I've ever read. It's one of the most valuable chapters I've ever read in my life,
I think. And what he mostly is doing is taking apart other Marxists and saying how inadequate
they are, which is, for me, just great. But the definition kind of boils down to that it is the
mythology, that the ruling class kind of semi organically, but sometimes deliberately weaves
in order to justify, maintain, and entrench its own power. And so it is a political mythology.
And the reason I think that we see this rising within the Enlightenment is not specifically
because of something to do with the Enlightenment, although perhaps I'm open to the contention,
to the hypothesis. What I see happening in this regard is that the, when you said that it clicked
with you with the Gnosticism, I think that what we saw is that the kind of Gnostic architects
that were kind of operating in parallel, and not even in parallel, literally mixed in,
I said miasma earlier, and I really mean it. There was no real distinction between mystics and
scientists and philosophers, and even theologians sort of throughout Europe in the late Middle
Ages, early modern period. There just wasn't Francis Bacon, which one was he, all of them.
So what are you going to do? Newton, several of them at once, you go to the Swabian pietist the
theologians from which Hegel and Marx derive several at once. What do you, I mean, it's just
mixed together. This is the problem with thinking from three, four hundred years ago,
is we hadn't clarified some of these things. And so what I see there is that the Gnostic
project got moved into politics, sociology and economics very deliberately. And the reason
I actually say that Hegel is the one who codified this, I don't think it's his doing.
We might blame Kant. We could definitely blame Rousseau, who I fear you sound a little bit like
at this point. I'm very, very familiar with Rousseau. And so I can explain why I'm not.
I'm nervous that the project you've outlined attends in the Rousseauian direction,
without some guardrails at least, the sentimentality, the, you know, attempt to get back to sensuousness
as a meaning, as a basis for understanding reality. But I don't disagree with you about
the body being the center of our experience and the mind. I'm all, you know, I'm also famously
an atheist, aka America's top Christian nationalist, but that's my other Christian nationalist.
Oh, really? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Well, we're at the forefront of this movement that's definitely
not a Fed operation in the United States at all, like the most obvious one that's ever been created,
like watching them just jump into it. But no, what I see though, is that I see that the mysticism
got moved into politics, into the Rumble politics. And I think Hegel codified this with the phenomenology
of spirit. In fact, this is sort of the other day, believe it or not, I tweeted, I just spent half
my day reading Judith Butler, and it was surprisingly clarifying. First of all, I shocked
myself. I don't know if you've had the pleasure. I've read Jen to trouble. Yeah. Well, as you know,
it's a slightly painful book to read. Didn't she win like first place or second place in like worst
sentence ever contest or the worst writing ever or something? I don't know. I wouldn't be surprised
if she did. I can sit down and read Judith Butler straight through like it's not that hard now.
Are you found out the Judith code? Well, I just know what the words mean and how they construct
sentences. So it's really not that complicated. I read I had the same thing with that was
the dialectic of sex. I can't remember. Oh, yeah, that one. Yeah. That was the first
principle theory books I was going to I tried to read. Total gibberish after about four years of
studying, I went back and reread it. I was like, I get this. Yeah, it took a long time. And Falstow
Sterling, that's who we're looking for on that one, I think. So anyway, I'm reading Judith
Butler and it finally clicks with me because she's got this whole thing. I'm kind of like
blowing my load too early here talking about this because I want to talk I want to do my own
podcast about this issue. But she's deriving this quote from Foucault, where Foucault, of course,
you know, these fucking French guys. So what are these post monitors? What does he do? Well,
it's not that the some very with the Gnostic concept, right? It's not that the body is the
prison for the soul. It's the soul is the prison for the body. That's Foucault. That's a literal
statement from Foucault. Judith Butler brings it up repeatedly throughout her writing. It's
mentioned in some other kind of foundational queer texts. So this is an important concept. And of
course, you read it and you're like, that makes zero sense whatsoever. How is the soul the prison
for the body? And what you realize is that what I'm saying when Hegel codified, what I'm seeing in
this transition to modern mysticism or modern Gnosticism, modern era Gnosticism is which is,
by the way, what Marxism kind of distills and it makes actionable. He becomes like the grand
priest of this is how you do modern Gnosticism. What Hegel codified is that the social constructions
are the spirit. So the social construction of society around you, which you're trying to manipulate
by either manipulating the idea or the material conditions, the the the the geist of society
is the spirit. But that's that I mean, literally, that's what the word means phenomenology
disguises. That's what the word means. So it's a spirit. And your soul is as a person, just part
of that spirit, which is on the trajectory of transformation of of history. And so you are
a part of that greater spiritual whole, your soul, whatever that represents is therefore your
understanding of yourself through the social constructions of reality. And thus the soul,
which is the social constructions of reality applied to you becomes the prison for your body.
So you're born with a weenie and the social constructions of what it means to be a man
imprison you because of your body. So your body is imprisoned because I'm like, oh,
shit, that's what she means. That's what Foucault means. The social constructions become the
artifice of the prison of the Gnostic line of thought in the modern going into postmodern
era. I do like this idea of it being a superior technology to have exploited this phenomenon.
But what you're seeing is simultaneously, we always talk about like the enlightenment,
and then there's a counter enlightenment, right? And of course, we got Stephen Hicks,
brilliant guy. I don't know if you've ever met him. He's fun to be around, actually.
Spoken to many times. Yeah, I like Stephen quite a lot. And Stephen's got his wonderful book,
what, back from 2005. So we're talking a while ago explaining postmodernism,
and he's talking about the counter enlightenment. And he's approvingly interacted with stuff I've
said to this, but I haven't spoken with him about it yet. I actually should call him and
talk to him. You definitely should. I mean, we've talked many times. We actually went to
the beach together for like a week. It was kind of fun. But I don't think there was a
counter enlightenment. I think there were two. I think there was the religious reaction to the
enlightenment. And then there was the romantic reaction to the enlightenment. And I don't think
that these two things are perfectly separable, right? Again, that mixture of enlightenment
thought, religious thought, and then mystical thought or Gnostic thought, all kind of blended
together in this. There was no distillation of these kind of three alchemical ingredients.
And the romantic reaction, this is where when I start hearing sentimental and during a Purse.
So maybe I should have chosen my words more carefully. I'll explain in a minute.
That's fine. That's fine. And I'm not putting you on the spot. I'm just no, no, no, no,
I just reacting as I go. But the romantic reaction is,
is so if we think of the religious reaction to the enlightenment as the ability to carve out
space for faith against reason, and there's a huge interesting discussion, I'm about to have a talk
I did in December come out today or tomorrow actually on this specific thing that I think
actually paints a way forward that might tap into something you really like. If we think of the
religious reaction as carving out against reason space for faith, I think of the romantic reaction
as carving out against reason space for mysticism and mythopoiesis. And I think that's poison,
and that's where the parasite lives. And so the space forward for me looks like, how do we get
faith and reason? For me, the magic sauce of the West, Ben Shapiro touches it in his, I forget
which book it is, he writes a book like every 15 minutes. You know, he writes at the same speed,
he talks. And so very far behind him. I'm trying to catch up. I'm training. I'm training. I got
an energy drink in my Hotez mad cup over here. I don't have coffee or tea in it. But no, what he
says is that it's somehow Athens plus Jerusalem, right? And so what is that emblematically, that's
kind of an archetype of reason that's Athens and an archetype of faith that's Jerusalem,
and also tradition, the Jewish tradition. I mean, Hanukkah, you eat fried food because 5,000 years
ago, they didn't run out of oil one day. Like, that's tradition. Like, you can't beat tradition to
that level, right? And so the idea of those things coming together to box out mysticism
is I think what's made the West so successful. But we've had this weird undercurrent of mysticism,
and sometimes just main current, we can't deny that there were masons involved in the founding
of the United States and in the direction of its creation. What do you mean by mysticism?
I mean, these kind of Gnostic, esoteric and hermetic approaches to transforming reality.
But it's similar to affecting your will upon reality, or some sort of process.
It's the ability to believe that you can project your will forward into reality and make your will
come to be in reality, which is the realm where ideology lives. In fact, it's in a sense what
ideology as Carl was describing it. It's what it exists to do, that you put your idea out first.
And then what you do, ironically, almost is you pretend that science, you pretend that you've
put out the hypothesis, and then you check against reality to tweak your hypothesis to keep going
forward. But in fact, really, what you're doing is you're bending circumstances to make your
hypothesis come true, and you never allowed to be falsified. And that's the problem. And I say,
it's, and I'll let Carl talk and let you guys talk in a second, but just to bring it up,
we do have to go back when we start excavating the roots of this, and I brought up Athens,
we have to excavate deep, because when Plato names Sientia, that's what he's actually talking about
anyway. These guys, Sientia is broken down into two components. If you go read how he
organized it, you've got a piece to May, which is the higher level reason thinking,
and then you have the lower level of, you know, knowing stuff, understanding how the world works,
called Dianoya, that applies to Techne, which is Techne is the idea of gaining technical
knowledge to be able to do things in the world. So why is that relevant? Because how did it get
into this story that I'm telling? Well, it's not even that mysterious, there's pretty good
evidence out there that Hegel just imported that architecture from Plato, which is to build a
technocracy. That's what, if you read Republic, that's what he's describing, is a technocracy.
That's the technology to build a technocracy on. The episteme is the higher level reason of the
philosopher kings who are going to guide the knowledge to the point of, wherever the ideology
points that they've thought up, their philosophy that they thought up a priori from the realm of
reason and the forms of how the world should be. And then Hegel just imports a shit and puts it
in German, calls them for numftim, for stand. And all of a sudden, he has this exact same program.
He updates it to early modern thinking or kind of late period. It's like the late end of early
modern, I don't know what they call that late early modern, because he's talking about, if you
read philosophy of right, he's talking about organizing a constitutional monarchy. If you
actually read it, you're like, wow, that looks like America with a king. And like, it's a lot of
the same stuff. Of course, America preceded Hegel in this, this was like 1821 or something like
that. He's writing this down. And so it's like divided powers, it sounds great, but you still
have this king. And this, you know, how it's in that, how's the king chosen, well, by the forces
of history and the conflict of opposites. And you know, all this nonsense that they're always into,
but he just imported the tech, the platonic technocracy with the concept of the platonic
epistome being the pathway to understand the ideology that guides the technocracy,
put it in German. And he actually becomes the guy who outlines the plan that Marx picks up and says,
actually, yeah, but flip it over so that we get to be on top as the grubs that don't do anything
and have an entitlement complex and hate everybody and don't take baths and stuff.
Let's take the program and flip it over so we win. But other than that,
yes. And the thing that's keeping this thing, this pyramid, the platonic pyramid of society upright
is the mythology called ideology that's understood in terms of they're in German,
they're fernund, the reason as it gets translated that guides the, the ideological program. And so
what did not to again put Carl on the spot because I actually like him. But when he says, you know,
this is the end of ideology, that's what Marx said he was building was the end of ideology.
But really what it was, of course, doing was he was forwarding his own ideology. So I'm not
saying this is what Carl's doing. Just everybody's clear. I'm saying that becomes a pitfall
of programs going forward that we must be very cautious about. And so for me,
I define liberalism and the Enlightenment very differently. I don't actually,
like I look back at these philosophers, these false assumptions, and I think,
aren't they adorable? That's great. But what I'm trying to find the essence under it.
And I think the essence under the liberal project is that none of us is God. That's it.
That's none of us has the power. None of us can become God. And that's retaining that human
thing you were speaking of. It also refutes the world economic form. Literally explicitly,
a homo deus coming from God, man coming from a Harari, him openly saying,
they are going to become gods and little see the arrogance of these people.
Look at him. He's gollum. He just hasn't turned ugly yet. Like he literally gollum.
And so he's got the ring. He's my precious. And humans are hackable animals, these people.
But it's that we're not God. And so how do we determine questions of things like political
authority? Who gets it? Well, the liberal answer in my opinion is, well, nobody deserves it.
So now we come up with a scheme to lend it to people with the consent of the people being
governed, et cetera, divided powers and all this. So I keep coming back to this and like Christians
tend to get pissed at me because I'm like distilling their Christian heritage of the nation or whatever.
But I actually think the fundamental assumption of this kind of broadly successful liberal project is
you're not God and you don't get to be God. In fact, that's true for everybody.
So you end up getting, you know, kind of a, we don't have obvious like physical equality.
Like some people are better at stuff, et cetera, or some people are bigger, some people are stronger,
some people are stupid, some people are whatever. We don't have that. But we, in terms of what it
means to have fundamental human dignity, there's a fundamental basis of equality because only God
in some sense has the authority to judge what somebody's human worth is. And since it's not,
it doesn't matter if God exists or not. All you have to say is none of us is that. So who has the
authority? And so what the whole liberal project does is it open for me is to open the door to
start trying to figure out how do we solve actual practical political problems under the assumption
that none of us gets to play God over anybody else? And it's not more complicated than that.
Everything else is details that flow downstream from this. Assumptions like the blank slate and
things are just frankly idiotic. Good try, John Locke, which thank you so much for your project,
especially for your articulation of the necessity of life, liberty, and property as
inalienable rights to secure liberty. But the blank slate, I mean, in the state of nature,
like, come on, guys, you can't blame him for his time, though, you know, you can understand why
you think of the state of nature thing. But yeah, he actually seems to have believed it as well.
Yeah, that's, that's, that's literally silly. Yeah, it is. And there's so much in John Locke
that is in one way genius and in the other way, obviously crackpot. And it does make me wonder,
but how old was he when he was writing this stuff? Because we often forget that a lot of these guys
were like in their 20s. Yeah, I would have to go back and check. I know he had to go into exile
after writing and he had to write it anonymously. Because what he was saying, he knew was insanely
radical. And this is actually one of the one of the sticks I used to beat the reactionaries now.
Well, like, well, this is, this is our version. And it's like, no, you are sitting in your house
that you own, and you're not worried about the state kicking down the door with you openly
espousing counter radical views. And so actually, we can say that liberalism has done good things.
And there are fruits of it that we'd like to harvest and keep. And so this is so many of these
guys that are telling me that they're ready for the war and that they practice on call of duty.
And like, they're not going to go to war, they're going to post memes to inflame it. And I'm like,
bro. Yeah. I have spoken to the, I went to a conference with them last year and I'm going to
get this year as well. So a lot of them are nice people, but just a bit online. And so essentially
my first explanation was that we're not, we're not revolutionaries. We're not going to, we're not
going to take up arms. Don't be silly. You know, none of you are. And that's fine. You don't have
to be, we can win this in other ways. Because in one sense, they have something that is true,
right? They have a good grasp on like the human, the genuinely sentimental, artistic human,
the aesthetic side of what it means to be a human. What, what makes life worth living?
Right. And that's what I think actually the enlightenment kind of doesn't have. And this
is what we need to start stitching back together. Because I agree with, by the way, great. In fact,
I think it's a, I think it's a feature, not a bug, but it leaves a massive hole. That's a problem.
Well, I, I, I... It's not just aesthetic. It's familial. It's family.
If we say aesthetic is in coming at the, having its origins in the sentiments, right? The,
the, what the, what an aesthetic experience is not something that's outside the world. It's
actually something that's within us. And it is playing on our sentiments, the environment plays
in our sentiments in order to make us feel in a particular way and have certain kinds of experiences.
And so the human experience is mostly aesthetic in that way. And so this, this is where I feel
actually we can say it's kind of the fault of the enlightenment. But when I say that, I'm not
saying, right, we need to jettison that because that's obviously irrational and silly because
so much good stuff came out of the alignment. We don't want to jettison the good things,
but we also don't want to be committed to the obvious absurdities. And James,
make a good point there. The, it is important and I, I swear to God, like it makes me laugh so hard
that it's too atheist saying, look, we need God. Okay. We need, we need to have that spot filled
because at the moment, look at the transhuman and transgender is I am God and I will remake my body
in my own image, right? It's like, no, you're not, you're, you're actually someone with a mental
illness. Okay. Right. I'm not trying to... And that's literally the hermetic thing, right?
Yes. It actually says at the point, you know, like the corpus hermeticum, like the poimondris
says that the point is to remember that you're God and then to become God. Yeah.
And exactly. And so we need to, we need to acknowledge that actually the problem with
reason alone is that it thinks, of course, it processes the world in abstractions and
it categorizes the world. And that's actually the opposite of, I think, how the aesthetic world
exists. And so we need to find a way of reconciling these things because, so look,
picking up on your point on Rousseau, I, now that after you said it, I thought, oh, how did he get
to that? But I kind of see how what I said could lead you to that point. But it's actually the
opposite of where I'm trying to go with this. Because so one of the, one of the good things
about liberalism is its individuality. It's individualism. It is a good thing to treat
a person as some, a cause in and of themselves and as something that is perfect and not a perfect,
sorry, worthy and unique, right? So yeah, sacred. Yeah, sacred is the right word. Now,
the problem with liberalism is that it can treat every person as something. However,
the problem it has is the categorization, the, essentially, it's the epistemology and ontology
of it, where it has to reduce each human being to the universal shared characteristics. And so
actually you're kind of reducing all of those differences, the human qualities, the detritus
of tradition that builds up in people. For example, my accent is one example. It's not a universal
accent. It's an English accent. And so we'd have to subtract that in our analysis of how
the three of us are all human. And so we have to slowly whittle away those things that actually
make us uniquely us in order to get to the universal man, which again is another false
assumption of liberalism. There never was one in order to say right now I have a conception of
every individual human person. Because of course, the universal thing is also an individual thing,
because it means everyone. And that's actually, I think the wrong way to go about it because
we do want to be concerned with the individual, but we don't want to reduce the individual to a mere
fungible item that is something that could be produced in an assembly line.
Just something like where we would make a new kind of style of art where we put nobody's face,
but just maybe what color exactly think of the representation of signs of the crosswalk signs
and things like that. It's a universal human shape, you know, so you know, it's meant to represent
a human, but no particular human. And that's where I think the problem of not just Rousseau,
but like Rousseau most embodies this problem, I think, where it's it's a generic universalized
human that has no commitments other than to the ideology in the state that propagates the ideology.
I find myself not having better language to use when I say, actually, I think the reverse is
necessary and we should have a more mythological view of people. So essentially, if we, and I'm
trying to take an aesthetic foundation to explain what I'm trying to get across here.
So you have to, I've not read anyone who's been able to articulate what I'm trying to articulate.
So if this comes across as clumsy, please forgive me. But essentially, we need to be able to frame
ourselves as the protagonists in a story, because every single person in a way is a protagonist in
a story. And the important thing about a protagonist is in a story is not that they are a universal
human, it's actually that they are a unique human, and they're an irreplaceable human, as in you can't
have Lord of the Rings without Aragorn, Gandalf, Gimli, Frodo and Sam. You can't just replace one
of those people, right? They are they are unique, and they will always be unique. And it's the
relationships that they have with the people around them, and the the events going forward,
and the moral, the overarching moral teleology of the thing that makes it what it is in a kind of
holistic way. And so these people don't just exist, they belong in this thing. And actually,
before the Enlightenment, and even afterwards, I suppose, that's how people kind of view the world.
That was the point of these stories. That was the point of telling the Iliad, that was the point
of reciting the Iliad in ancient Greece. That was the the characters are a unique and necessary
component of the story, in the same way that you and the people you love are in unique and
necessary component in your story, personally. And so now we've got away from the idea of
categorization. We don't have to interchange anything. We don't need a universal human.
Everyone is their own story. And actually, this gives us a much more human dimension,
because now we don't have to whittle away all of those differences. Actually,
the differences can be enriched and brought out and fully understood. And suddenly, you
find yourself being more empathetic to that person, because of their characteristics,
rather than to abstract groups, the oppressed or whoever it is. Because an individual, you can
say, look, I can see the suffering, I can empathize, if you know, you can put yourself in the shoes.
And this is, I think, a better way of conceiving of these things, and also allows us to bring
across the set of virtues that the Enlightenment identified and say, well, these are goods for
the individual that gives for the public, they're goods in general, we don't need to be committed
to false rationalistic foundations. And we can hopefully bring these things together and create
a world that actually we like living in, where we don't hate each other for arbitrary reasons.
And the only people that we would hate are people who have actually physically wronged us.
And even then, this is where Christianity comes into it, is let's talk about forgiveness and
reconciliation, justice. What do you think of that?
No, I actually think that this, I think I might be able to give you something to chew on that
might help you think about what you're thinking about. I don't disagree with this conception,
and the fact that this is how humans understand ourselves and each other in relationship to
each other, and that part of the problem is that in the search for universal man in the realm of
differences, like I made the interjection a moment ago about the interchangeable avatars of race,
gender, identity, et cetera, that is so characteristic of we'll call it diversity art,
which is a form of postmodern Soviet realism or socialist realism. I would actually say it's
socialist hyper realism if we're going to just incorporate into it. Well, I mean, it's very
good for corporatist marketing purposes and propaganda as well. But it's a form of socialist
hyper realism, this art form where everybody has no face, but you can tell what color their hair
and clothing tell you what gender they probably are, so they become avatars of identity. But
what this is, this is the search for identity in class, right? And so the other side of the coin,
and I'll come back to the the kind of storytelling thing in a moment, because I think that's
actually huge. And I think you are banging on a very important door, nothing to take away from
that, but it's something to add to it. But this other side of the universal man coin is the individual
and there are some, this is a fruit of the enlightenment that we are thinking of each
other or as each person as the individual, there's this weird tension and, you know, we dragged it
out in cynical theories and talked about it, that kind of if you think of it, that liberalism is
pointing toward the concept that there is something universal about mankind that makes us in a sense
sacred, but at the same time, we are at the end of the day, each individuals, and we can't forget
that. So we don't want to lose the fact that that is a fruit of enlightenment thinking. We're
not just, you know, peons under this Lord or serfs under that. We're not just members of this nation
or members of this church or this diocese or whatever else. We don't think of ourselves necessarily
just in terms of whatever class we've been assigned or cast, depending on how thoroughly
gnostic and monistic the circumstances are. There is a fundamental individual at the bottom of the
pile. And so that weird tension is key, I think, to enlightenment thinking. But what I was going
to point out, I don't know if you, not that I'm a giant fan of Daniel Kahneman by any means,
but I think there's something interesting. Actually, I don't like his expression of it,
as well as I like Joshua Green. So there's these two books. Daniel Kahneman is very famous,
Thinking Fast and Thinking Slow or something or Thinking Fast and Slow. I've heard of the book.
I've never read it though. Yeah. And so Joshua Green has a book called Moral Tribes and they both
present the same idea, although it's the point of Kahneman's book, it's not the point of Green's
book. But the idea is that there are basically two modes of human thought. One is we could call
Thinking Fast, one is thinking slow. Green gives a much, I think, more graspable metaphor for it,
which is a camera on automatic settings versus manual settings. A camera on automatic settings,
you pick it up, you take your picture, comes out good, never great, right? Or great by accident,
sometimes. However, you're sitting there twiddling the lens and on manual mode and you can get it
perfect. You can get the framing, the lighting, the lens, whatever. I'm good to focus. I'm looking
for words and I can't think of them. The bokeh, whatever the hell you want to get. No, no, I
totally get that. Exactly what we want on the manual settings and the automatic will never
quite do it. But the problem is, you've got to set up your shot. I have a friend who actually
used to be a professional still life photographer for commercials and stuff. He told me about this
one time where he spent literally every waking hour for a week taking a picture of a fucking bottle
of Coca-Cola. And the picture that came out is like, wow, that should be in a magazine because it
turns out that's what it was. But he ended up taking like, there's digital, so he ended up taking like
800 photographs of a bottle, tweaking the light, tweaking the light, and twisting the knobs and
everything that was like, you know, this bottle that's more real than real in the end. It's a
perfect photograph, right? And so that's manual mode. And so the reason I'm bringing this up is
our thinking fast mode, according to both of these guys is where we spend most of our time,
more than 90% of our time, almost all of our social time. We are not thinking rationally when we
are interacting with other humans, except to like hash out ideas, which is a philosophical
project. But in our normal like social interactions, how do we guess what we're going to do with the
person? You know, we're face to face, you say something, I have to respond and react. That's
all done in what they call intuitive thought or automatic mode on the camera. And it's therefore
done by heuristics, it's done by that weight of tradition, it's done by those kind of, you know,
either aesthetic or sentimental decisions that you just kind of make.
It's not rational, like you described, I don't make breakfast like you do,
apparently, but like you described making breakfast, right?
Would you just bring up Carl fry or something like that or fry up some thing nobody does.
Some probably involves a fish or some mashdown and bacon sausages.
God, I love sausages though. It's the only British sausage is British.
Thank God for you and your little kippers or whatever you call them. Yeah. So anyways,
the Cumberland sausages. That's so good. Yeah. Yeah. But so anyways, and it's funny,
I live in the Cumberland region of Tennessee, but so I'm all confused when I go to your island.
But you know, I've talked to Peter Rogosian now because I called it your island.
Yeah. Your small savage island nation where I was recently. It was beautiful.
The point being that we have two modes of thinking and that one of these discoveries since
John Locke or whoever you want to hold up as an avatar is that the intuitive mode of thought
is where we spend most of our time, do most of our social interaction, have most of our
experiences that we call human. But the thinking slow portion, the manual mode is where we have
to go and we have to get right answers about something important. And what we have to be
able to do is to tame that. And this is I think the essence of that enlightenment that we don't
want to lose that liberal project that we don't want to lose is we have to tame those intuitive
modes override them very often. Like for example, the impulse to want to be right,
which feeds into confirmation bias and these other biases where rather than going to
disconfirm our hypothesis, which is ultimately what mature science is about, we go to confirm our
hypothesis and thus create a mythology or an ideology for ourselves or around our concept.
Oh, you know, I think it's this guy's in cahoots with so-and-so and I'm going to go out of my way
to go find like every time he was ever in a picture with Bill Gates or something. So
that can prove that they were working together. So sometimes yes, sometimes no, sometimes whatever,
but you get me. And so the rational aspect, if we look at liberalism, and we kind of loosen
our grip on it a little bit, and rather than it being this, you know, age of reason that's reason
becomes the only in the gold standard, it's actually that reason has its domain, and that reason is
the corrective to the tribal class thinking very intuitive default mode. But we can't lose that
because that's the human. That's I think the space that we need to be working on, that there's this
very human intuitive approach, but that you kind of have to keep in the back of your head that
you're probably going to be for navigating daily life. Yeah, great, but you're probably going to
get the wrong answer when it matters nine times out of 10 if you live there, you're going to come
up with bullshit self gratifying self self justifying post hoc rationalization land.
And so there's this and not everybody spends like not everybody is a scientist in a sense,
they are but they aren't. Not everybody spends a lot of time in that. So it becomes that there's
almost these two domains. Are we living or are we trying to get right answers so that we can live
better? Right. And one of those requires tremendous discipline. And that's the ascension of reason.
So when I see liberalism again, I go back to this one axiom, which, whether you believe in God or
not, doesn't matter. It's we're not that we don't have omniscience, we don't have omnipotence, we
don't have perfect clarity and understanding of thought. And so what? And so what we have to do
is we have to be willing to recognize that we're limited and fallible. Christians like to call
it fallen. I don't need a story for why we're limited and fallible. I just think that we're not
as cool as we think we are and are not as smart as we think we are. In fact, I think I'm wrong
95% of the time and the 5% is pretty damn good. Twitter agrees with you on that, James.
Well, Twitter is wrong. It's a thing stopped by everyone. Twitter is wrong.
Literally. What did I say recently? I said that Twitter, it's like, oh, shit, what is it? This
is actually great. It's like upside down Cassandra, right? Cassandra is this myth where she sees the
future perfectly, but nobody believes her. But Twitter is like, it sees the present completely
wrong and everybody believes it all the time. It's like, it's like inverse Cassandra complex or
something. So anyway, I just think that we have to view liberalism as saying, listen,
your natural impulses are going to get it wrong when it matters a lot. So let's tame those. It's
I used to think that it was the ascendancy of reason. And then I started to think it's like,
maybe these guys thought humans aren't very good at this, but it's good when we
try to discipline ourselves for it. And that it became a corrective to our impulses to live in
thinking fast, even at times where we need to step into thinking slow. And again, I'm not endorsing
Conom and Conom's got his own issues. But I mean, anybody in the academic world that's propped up,
I think he's the second most cited author or something like that. Anybody's propped up that
far. Like that's one of my one of my little traditional heuristics these days is like you
said, if everybody's going in a direction with the vaccine, maybe he's great. I don't know. Maybe
this isn't a rational decision, but he's propped up something fake going on over here, right? Like
beware. But that concept though, that we have two modes of thinking intuitive and rational,
which in a sense is a mathematician, I'll say are artistic and mathematical.
I think there's even like this kind of like this is I'm bullshitting right now. Give me a minute.
But I remember reading something at some point that said that when we do mathematics,
because I'm a mathematician, it crossed my path. It's like you only have one math channel in your
brain unless you're John von Neumann or something. And so like if I tell you go ahead and like,
take the number 37 and square it in your head, your whole focus goes down one path and you
can't do anything else functionally while you do that because it eats up all of your Ram so to
speak to run down that path. But if I tell you to start thinking of artistic things, it's like
you're in like free association land in an instant, you're thinking a million things at once,
once I tap into that side. So these kind of very linear and very like explosive intuitive fluid
sides of thought. And I think that these and how long would it take you to square 37 in your head?
Like, if you're good at it, like 20 seconds, 30 seconds, if you're Arthur Benjamin, you can do
it speaking of all of our famous Benjamins, the math and magician. He he can do these things like up
to four digit numbers in like an instant. It's really impressive. But it takes a while because
that's a slow form of thought. And I think it's that when you need right answers to social questions
in the human experience, you need to dive into the intuitive. And when you need right answers
about hard detailed things that matter, you have to dive into the rational. And then wisdom becomes
like this capstone that helps you determine which realm you're in and when and which realm you need
as well. And and to purpose, right, to the circumstances. Yeah, like, I don't need to be
try to go be hyper rational with your wife. See how that works out for you. Yeah. Right. It's
sometimes it's just or you're two year old. Well, yeah, right. Just try it. Right. But you know,
tell your wife that she seems upset. And that's an irrational thing. See how it goes. You know,
it's like irrationality is going to multiply. There are times where you have to know which realm
you're in. And you don't need to like, if you're going to a party, a social engagement, a conference
or whatever, the after meet and greet, the reception, and you're like calculating and
triangulating who you're going to talk to and when you're going to talk to them and why you're
talking. First of all, you're spurting out. Stop it. And second of all, you're living. You're in
the reason mode when you need to be in the intuitive mode and you're you're missing something.
And I think that there's something gigantic here. I think that there is a huge temptation
within liberal enlightenment thought to put this primacy on reason, rather than putting reason
into the container where it goes, which is when we need to slow down and get right answers,
if somebody's got to have a surgery or something, we need to slow down and get right answers. But
if you're just trying to figure out how to make somebody feel better about the fact that they
need a surgery, it's not time to start doing calculations. It's time to sit down and put a
hand on their shoulder and be a human being with them. That's honestly exactly how I feel about
this. I can't help but be brought into mind of Aristotle when, really, he summarizes all as
the cardinal virtue of prudence, knowing when is a good time for what is literally the beginning
of all wisdom and the very first virtue. And with good reason, this is precisely how somehow
we've gone two and a half thousand years back to this exact place. Because we're in the same fight,
Carl. Exactly. The human condition never changed. And so very much when he's like,
man is a rational animal, I think that is the correct dichotomy about what a human being
really is in its essence. And it is that I think that the enlightenment has latched to the rational
side, and now it's come to a point where it's stigmatizing the animal side. And the animal
side will happily stigmatize the rational side if that's let alone to its own devices as well.
And so when you were saying how these things need to be in their proper place and use their
proper time, that's exactly right. And the problem that I think the rational side has
is that it can only work in the realm of theory, right? It can only think that's all it does. It's
rational. And so it can't help but categorize the world. But when you start categorizing things,
you are abstracting away from a real animal thing, a real solid thing in the real world.
And it's that where the beating heart is, it's that where the feelings are.
Right. I mean, this is what Hegel said about immediacy, right? You have to get to that. That's
what they're seeking. That's what the sentiment of Rousseau is, is looking for that immediacy,
that true experience, not just to interject. I'm not criticizing by bringing them up. I think
that they're the reason their project has been so successful at screwing up the world in such
horrible ways. French Revolution, anybody, Bolshevik, you know, the legacy is horrific
is because if that's tapping into something extraordinarily real.
Yes. It's something that resonates with people because there is a truth, a kernel of truth
embedded within it. And it is the issue, I think, is that we have allowed ourselves to pretend
the virtue can be done by thought rather than by action. And it is through the exercise of these
virtues that we become the kind of people that we have self-respect for and the kind of people that
we take on respect for others. And so the reason that I'm trying to get away from abstract categoricals
is because they've got this inherent dehumanizing effect. As soon as you start abstracting to more
than one person, then you necessarily have to start removing the human element to a degree
from whatever group you're trying to identify. And this is where I think this is where you
end up with the Holocaust. This is the logical endpoint where it's just a group. I don't know
any of them and they're all bad because I've calculated why they are bad. And actually,
that's just not real. You know, the reality is if there is a particular person who's done a particular
act that comes with it, a moral judgment that a sensible person would make, then you can take
action because that person is a criminal or a conspirator or something like this. You don't
just have this abstract category that you're applying to a bunch of people you've never
seen and you can't identify. And so it's this way of thinking that we need to find a way of
breaking past. So we can marry up the, and there's a very good way of describing it,
the slow and fast thinking, because it just genuinely represents the rational and the animal.
We need to have these married up. These just can't be separate ways and unique ways of looking at
the works. It just is not true. And it comes with significant price. It really does. And
we're watching it now. And the problem as well with the rational side of things is that, okay,
let's assume that everyone is a unique, is an independent sovereign will that is
in the flesh on this earth. Why? Why do they do anything? They don't know, you know? And so
not only is there a falsehood embedded within it that, okay, yeah, actually turns out that
all of your impulses aren't just the sovereign will of its own, making it, you know, in choices.
It's all biological impulses that are being translated into thoughts by your brain that you
desire, ultimately. But it also means you don't feel like you're attached to anything. And it's
these human attachments that we really need to start thinking about, especially in the modern era
where everyone's on social media and no one really feels attached to any of the people
that they actually live in. We're all parasocial in our entire experience.
Exactly. And it's giving us false senses of belonging. And that's actually really quite
terrible. And I'm just as guilty as anyone else of doing this. I'm totally guilty of doing this.
But the concept of belonging, what it's predicated on is that there is something
into which you could belong. And this is where the human side of the sentimental side of our
existence is withering away. It's genuinely a concern to me that people in Generation Z,
I see them talking to each other about things that they have no idea about. Like love,
they don't seem to understand the concept of romantic love. They have been conditioned
by the progressive millennials to view every interaction as transactional and not sentimental.
And so these people just don't understand what it's like to feel like they belong somewhere,
to feel like someone is uniquely related to them in some way. And it's horrific. And honestly,
I don't know if it's resolvable. I don't know if you can teach someone this
if they haven't been brought up in this way. I mean, I'm genuinely afraid of it, actually.
I'm a little more hopeful on that than it can be because of things, you know, growing up myself
and my own things I've overcome as I've matured into what I now believe is a fairly fruitful
adulthood. So I'm a little optimistic about that just to lay your fear. The thing is,
I don't disagree with you about what you're saying. I just don't lay the blame for it at the feet of
the Enlightenment because I go back to that emphasis on the individual that is also there
that is not present in the same way previously. And so that emphasis on individual, especially
individual rights, which thus defines the individual that enables, I mean, why did Locke say
life, liberty and property? Well, if you can't lock somebody up and you can't
set liberty and you can't kill them, that's life and property, you can't depose them of their ability
to feed, clothe and shelter themselves, then you have a hard time controlling their thoughts.
You have a hard time controlling their speech, which is like the expression of their thoughts.
And therefore they can be an individual. And in fact, being that he was a pious man,
they can pursue their belief in God without the strictures of a state or some other external power,
possibly condemning them to eternal torment because of what, you know, if you were that state,
you decided I have to believe about God. What if I'm right and you're wrong?
Being the kind of irresolvable question. And if none of us are God, none of us can answer that
question. So none of us has the right to impress that on each other. So this is the individual
is preserved in a unique way by the Enlightenment. But that there is there is a method of going too
far with it. But where I'm seeing, again, I really want to play this blame. And the Enlightenment
carries, as I mentioned, that miasma again, its own set of figures that I think that this is the
problem we have to figure how to resolve is the literally, and I mean this quite literally,
is the Gnostic thread that has run through the modern era into the postmodern that we've never
disentangled. Academics won't touch it. Nobody talks about it. But this idea of
this kind of hyper rationality is the Platonic episteme. This hyper rationality is the
fornumped this idea that are that we're going to lift up where you identify the problem. So now
we have two people and they become a group by default. And so we abstract, we have two opposites
and that are different, and we try to understand them in some kind of unifying whole. That's the
dialectic of Hegel. He even describes it in terms of apples at one point. They only have a green apple
or a yellow apple and a red apple. How are they the same? How can they both be the same? How do we
dare call them both apples? You know, this kind of thing, this categorization, the idea of obliterating
categories to arrive at immediacy is in fact, in my opinion, the Hermetic project,
which is a Gnostic project that is a huge danger swing and a miss from what, so when you keep
saying it's like, I'm like, you sound a little bit like Rousseau, you sound a little bit like Mark,
that sounds a little bit like Hegel, but you're like, but no, it's the other way.
And that's I think what we're getting at is that you want a non Gnostic approach to answering
the same questions that are there. And this is why I say that I don't feel a need to lay the
blame at the feet of the Enlightenment. I feel the need to lay the blame at the feet of this
esoteric thread that none of us have pulled out of that story yet. And then my thought is,
I actually like, you know, when you're talking about looking a little bit ahead or whatever,
I don't necessarily disagree. I'm not sure what to do with that yet. So I'm just not doing anything
with it. But I like the idea. I feel like liberalism properly construed and properly implemented
whatever that would mean. So what do I mean by that essential identification of the individual
and the human freedom secured, etc. Okay, allows for the organic evolution of society without
the selection pressures of, frankly, megalomaniacs stepping in and trying to determine which direction
things are going to go, which is the essence of what the lack of direction means that the megalomaniacs
and the psychopaths will rise to the top without a direction. How do you weed out?
I think I actually, sorry to interrupt, but I this, we seem to be a particularly interesting
point here because there's always direction, right? Direction is it comes from your personal
impulses as in what do we want? As in what do we not have? What do we want more of? You know,
what would be good for us? There's always direction, right? So I'm not worried about that
actually. And there are external pressures that are going to cause trouble that we have
to deal with. The thing that I want to talk about is the the Gnostic thread here, because
there's something about the privileging of reason that I think ends us at the point of
Descartes, where he essentially says, no, the will is the only thing I can be completely
sure exists. And everything follows from that. And I don't, you are right. I want a holistic
approach to the human being, right? The human being is both his body, his will, his experiences,
his memories, his stories, his like relationships, he is this full rounded thing. And the problem
of the enlightenment is I think the thread goes to that place where it thinks of itself as the
only legitimate thing. And I agree with you that there could be something we could call liberalism
that does have a holistic approach. But the way that the philosophy is constituted at the moment
and the emphasis it places on some things instead of other things leads us to a point
where we, I think, are always going to get the fangs of the parasite in us.
I think that may be true.
Whether we like or not. So this is why I'm interested in beginning at the place that
Aristotle found himself in, actually, and working from there. Because Aristotle believes that
all sort of hierarchy of these things, and they're all appropriate, none of them are stigmatized
in his view. And that actually seems like a more reasonable place to start to be. But sorry,
go on.
No, no, no, it's fine. I actually think that, again, I keep drawing back to this miasma thing.
It's so important to realize. So let's take Stephen Hicks, for example, and you read
explaining postmonarism. And of course, he absolutely blasts Russo as you should.
Yes. But then who does he kind of lay at the, who does he kind of like create as the character
who's sort of the problem, the universal problem that leads to postmonar, Kant, right?
So he makes Kant kind of this arch figure of the counter-enlightenment, right? So it's Kant,
an enlightenment figure or a counter-enlightenment figure. And you go into these online debates,
at least, or you talk to even philosophers who are professionals, and just watch them just like,
you're talking like cat fight, like, you know, is he an enlightenment figure or a counter-enlightment
figure? What this suggests is that there's something else going on. And one of my attempted
resolutions has been that there were two counter-enlightments. That's fine. But as a
matter of fact, these things aren't distinct. The miasma thing is a real problem. You had a
character like Hegel, who is doing certain enlightenment thinking, who is also explicitly,
unambiguously, proudly a mystic. He's just a fucking wizard. The dude's a sorcerer. He's not
even a philosopher, but he does some philosophy. He does some theology. He doesn't do any science.
Let's just not even lie. He's a shithead on that. But you have these characters that are kind of all
of these things at once. And so why is this thing that you just brought up? It's because there's
more than one definition of reason. That thing where, for Hegel, the word is for nymphed in German,
gets translated. I don't even know what that word means on its own, but it gets translated as reason
with a capital R when Hegel's rendered into English. Not reason with a lowercase R, reason with a
freaking capital R. And so now you have this same situation that you always end up with when you
have these, whether it's woke, whether it's Marxist, whether it's, what does democracy mean?
We'll ask a Marxist. It means you're under communism because everybody's equal. So everybody has
equal representation. Without that, it's not truly democracy. What does the people mean? Those people
who support the system? There's double meanings for all these things. I think that when we say
the enlightenment, there's not only just not one counter enlightenment, there's not even the
enlightenment. There's this kind of sprawling mess of different thinkers that you kind of can put in
and out at the same time. Kant being an enlightenment figure and a counter enlightenment figure of one
type or another, all at the same time. Hegel may be being all three at once. Rousseau, where's he?
Definitely some enlightenment ideas. Definitely informed some of these things that we call the
enlightenment. Also a blatant Gnostic. Man is born free and everywhere he's in chains. There is no
more Gnostic sentence than that other than I am a Gnostic. You put these things down and it's like
which one were these people? This is why I'm saying we haven't pulled this thread out. In fact, we
kind of have to rescue liberalism from the long train of Gnosticism that's been running through
it from its beginning because it grew out of the fusion of trying to mess around with the space for
reason, meaning two things at once. Faith, meaning maybe more than one thing at once.
And then mysticism, which is like, oh my gosh, guys, we can transform the world. Maybe we can
transform humans. What does that look like? I don't know. Let's get into some weird racicultism
and then put a bunch of Jews in ovens. That's where that ended. But that's racicultism and
this same idea that we can out reason what the world really is. And so that was a rambly thing
that boils down to I think that there are two definitions at least of reason that they have
threaded their way through the development that we're calling the enlightenment in that particular
meaning the word the that particular article there makes us blind to the fact that what we're
talking about is a much more complicated and organic derivation that sprawled across over
hundreds of years with a couple of hundred years with lots of different kinds of thinkers.
And so that's where like my project with regard to thinking about liberalism
or post-liberalism if we want or going forward or 21st century liberalism or holistic liberalism
which make up words. Let's just throw adjectives. I don't care. My thinking with it is is we have
to get down to the essence of what was trying to be achieved, what something made for enormous
and I don't mean it in a flippant or glib way genuine progress over the last 300 years.
And I know the return dudes with the V can pretend that this progress is all fake and they show the
picture of like a wonderful palace and they're like why do we build these ugly buildings now?
And it's because we don't have slaves. They've got genuinely like actually valid points about
that. There are valid points and there are invalid parts as well. Like I've seen them share the
images of like the Tsarist palaces in Russia that literally bankrupted the nation so that the king
could have his awesome palace. And there's a reason why we don't do that anymore is because
when everybody's actually free to do their own thing, we don't bankrupt nations to build something
except for vaccines or something. But the point being is I just think that there's more than one
meaning of reason, one of which is mystical, which is that science, it's the epistome and say
NTA or the Frenumft and the system, the Wiesenschaft, the Hegel put out. And then there's this thing,
this is just like with the progression of science. Newton's over here cooking up calculus,
figuring out the Brachastroni problem or whatever it's called, Bracharistochrone,
that's what it is. And he's over here solving that problem. He's over here developing
differential equations out of his ass, creating physics, you know, mechanics like
unbelievable stuff this guy's doing. Meanwhile, he's drinking mercury so he can figure out how to
live forever, right? Yeah, like, we got some problems here. 400 years later, we're like, oh,
shit, quantum mechanics. And science hasn't even really matured. We have Hegel criticizing Newton
over optics. Well, Newton's optics turned out to be right. Hegel's full of shit. Because we have
this guy that's over here working in his reason. Oh, okay, how could there be seven colors inside
of one color, you know, or whatever he's doing? This is just nonsense. What you have is this
maturation process of what we're calling the enlightenment. And I feel like we were to the
point where there was where we're really getting to kind of a mature understanding of it. And that's
also when the parasite latch onto the side of it. We're the 30s and the 40s, not to hold them up
at some special time or whatever. But this is when we really started to like, holy crap,
we've got to pull some of the mysticism off of the way we've thought about some of these things.
And this is kind of why a lot of people look back at the 50s is like this hyper rational,
but in some weird way, really good time is because it's kind of like the peak of the fruit of that
turned out to be positive positivist movement, which is its own complicated thing, and went too far.
But there's, it's almost like we have to let the idea of reason mature and we have to shed off
that Gnostic aspect, which is not reason. It's like the difference between truth and your truth.
They have like reason and our reason or science and the science. And it's that where I think the
center play goes. So again, it's, I don't, I don't even know that there's a thing called the enlightenment
to lay blame upon, but to the degree that it's true, I don't lay blame there. I, we've, we don't
know what it looks like when we let it, when we mature it and take this Gnostic aspect and just
hammer it out because nobody talks about it. Nobody, nobody, I mean, it's, it's, it's green
space completely right now. So the, the problem that I think we might have, and I'm not saying this
is definitively, but this has been my impression of it, is that actually it might not be possible to
separate the thread of Gnosticism from liberalism. And so if that is the case, we have to question
what our commitment to the, to the term liberalism is, because actually I think, and there are,
I think I was guilty of this quite some time. I was emotionally attached to the term liberalism,
and thinking of myself as a liberal. I had attached a bunch of moral sentiments to this
that made me in some way morally good person because I thought that this
contains something within it. But I think actually we can detach ourselves from the term
and realize that actually this doesn't make us morally invalid. And it also allows us to be more
flexible with what we do here, because I agree with you. There are definitely different kinds of
reason or intelligence. I agree with you, by the way, on detaching from the term as well.
And so this is why I'm happy to use post liberal, because I don't want to,
I don't want to abandon liberalism, you know, and I never, I never have wanted to,
but it's clear that there is something that's wrong with it. And I think you may have identified
accurately in the Gnostic thread, but I think it is so bound up. I don't understand how it could be
unpaved. I don't see a way, right? So all I'm thinking is, okay, well, let's,
we can bifurcate here and learn from the experience that liberalism has given us
and craft something that is free of that Gnostic problem.
Right. And so this, for me, is where it's like, I'm trying to, I want to boil down.
Imagine it's like literally we're taking liberalism and putting it in a pot and boiling it down.
And so all of these kind of false assumptions, we don't have to think so much about these.
I mean, we need, we need to address them, but like, what's under them? Why, what's going on?
What were these guys after? What were these ideas chasing? And that's again, I just keep
coming back to it, is that let's start with a simple fundamental axiom, which I think is the
fundamental liberal axiom. We don't have to call it the liberal axiom. The name doesn't matter.
I'm not at, actually, by the way, don't have an emotional attachment to be identified as a liberal.
I don't like to be identified like as anything. Well, surely it's just James Lindsay.
That's right. People are liberal. But no, no, no, no. How mythological of you? You know,
James, that's right. The man, the myth, the legend. That's not wrong. Everyone is, you know,
but yeah. So the thing is, though, is it's, we're not God and we're not going to be God.
And let's start from there. What does it look like if we just accept that no human being gets to have
that status or gets to usurp that status and lord it over some other person? In the word Lord
is chosen very intentionally in that expression. What does it look like? What does political
authority look like? What do we have to do to deal with that? What does, you know, what does
kind of social relating look like under this kind of thing? And what you start ending up with is a
whole lot of libertarianism and a whole lot of Americanism and a whole lot of stuff that,
you know, they stabbed at really well in the Magna Carta. And so, you know,
you're kind of along the lines of those projects when you get to that point. And so,
it also is a fundamental rejection of the Gnostic project. We're never going to be,
it's not even that we're not gods. We will never become gods. We have no claim to make on that
level of authority. So then you have questions like, well, how do you decide who gets to be in
charge? Whether it's politically, whether it's in terms of a project, whether it's leading a family,
well, the answers come down to things like, you know, traditional Moors and which is a question,
but ultimately competence and merit. The people who get to lead projects are people who prove that
they have the access or the ability to lead a project. As the hard part becomes, how do you
determine whether or not they have proven such, credentialism is a problem, nepotism is a problem,
people just, you know, going on TV and scamming a bunch of voters and getting elected,
even though they're frauds is a problem, people being run, you know, like actresses being run,
you know, through deliberate campaigns through things like the Justice Democrats as a problem.
You have ways that that system would be gained, but Jordan Peterson hit something extremely
important here, that the legitimacy in the hierarchies, if we want legitimate hierarchies,
comes from competence, and that that's an ideal in the sense not in like a platonic ideal, but that
the higher the level of ordering of a hierarchy, the higher the competence is the fundamental
principle ordering that hierarchy, the less corrupt it is. So those are kind of like two
antagonistic competence and corruption are like literally two antagonistic concepts.
And so by, if we start with the assumption, so again, what does it mean to be liberal absent all
of the kind of like John Locke and all Montesquieu and all these guys, what are they right absent
all of that baggage? What does it mean? Well, we start with the idea that we're not God, how do
we resolve these questions like who gets to be in charge? Well, we have to defer to merit and
competence. And what we're what it then becomes is a mechanism that starts to build out legitimacy
and hierarchies, which is ultimately, I think what the liberal project is meant to be about.
It's a conflict resolution scheme. It's a mechanism by which we can start to
hash out legitimacy and hierarchies to the best of our ability. It's never going to be perfect.
But the problem is, and this is what I alluded to this earlier, you brought it up earlier. And
when you bring up now, you know, that you had an emotional attachment to identifying as a liberal,
which God knows we know a lot of people, you know, in our spaces that are that way pathologically.
What I see happening in that case is that people are expecting liberalism to do something
it's not meant to do. It's not meant to give you a story of your life. It's meant to make it so
the state can't give you one for you. It's not meant to give you meaning in your life. It's meant
to free you up to pursue meaning where you seek it is not meant to tell you how to operate your
relationships. It's meant to allow you to pursue that on your own terms, which is freedom and scary.
And not something everybody wants when I've been to China many times. I've talked to Chinese people
who obviously live under a tyranny. And some of them are like, please, please, please don't let
America fall if it falls the world's done. And others are like, we like to be told what to do.
It simplifies things. I haven't ever run into an individual of this kind, but I just read something
yesterday talking about one of the impulses underneath communism. Of course, I have it's
very famous that it gives you the power to punish your neighbor. But there's a lot of people who
actually don't want actually to get the state to punish your neighbor for you. They don't mind
being told what to do if it means that their neighbor gets told what to do. And it's not going
to, you know, they don't mind it. They like that idea. I talked to a guy, one of the things that
radicalized me in like 2012 or 13, I was talking to a grad, a guy I went to grad school with,
and he was, we were, you know, it was atheist days, right? Back in the day. And I mean, you were,
you were in there, I was in there and the whole thing and there's like all the feminist bullshit
that was just out of freaking control. And I was talking to this guy about his frustrating me. And
he was like, yeah, but I look forward to our feminist overlords. I'm like, wait, what? And he,
I'm like, this is some some beta orbiter stuff. And he's like, I'm like, what? And he's like,
yeah, when women are telling men what to do, that's one less thing for me to think about.
And it turns out that's exactly the rationale I heard in China. So it's not everybody craves
this. It's scary to be free. But if you start believing that liberalism is going to answer
questions for you, like what your meaning in life or what it's supposed to be or what your
aesthetic experience is supposed to look like, then of course it's going to disappoint you.
It's designed literally to make sure authorities can't do that to you.
And so at this point, do you mind if I introduce you? So I think this is very interesting because
I think it's at this point because Benjamin, I know you've been interested in the concept of
tradition for a while and the traditions you've been tradition. Yeah, just the spaces you've
been engaging with recently. And I think this is where the concept of tradition actually begins
to apply because yes, I agree with everything you just said there, James. But I'm also aware
that what you've said is particular to a people, a place, a time, and the result of a continuous
and contiguous history. Because like you said, not everyone values that. But the way that was
framed was very much rationalistically, right? This was the, as I was saying, ideas are actually
a product of a time and place. I don't mean this is a criticism either. It's a very natural for us.
post enlightenment people to frame our ideas in exactly that way. And what you've
constructed there is a kind of ideological frame that we can pick up and place down.
But that's not how I think we should think about it. Because as you referenced,
there's a reason that we speak in English, there's a reason that we care about the things that we
care about, as the post-moderns would say, we're placing value on the fact that we're even talking
about them. And there's a reason that you trace that lineage back to the Magna Carta. Because what
we are talking about really are the values of England. And this is something that, of course,
why wouldn't America hold the values of England? It was founded by Englishmen. Why wouldn't these
continue to be propagated generation after generation? And so now we're not thinking in
the abstract realm of ideas, we're thinking in the concrete real world in which we live.
And I think that changing the locus of where we begin like that actually allows us to
center ourselves in a way that allows us to properly understand the people around us as well.
Because what, like I said, I agree with everything you're saying, but I'm also aware that I only
agree with that really, because I'm an Englishman. If I was some Iranian imam or something, I'd be
like, no, this is preposterous. Why would anyone agree to any of this? God's law is God's law.
They would just think you're a kook, a loon. But to me, it seems like second nature. And of
course, I agree with all that. Why wouldn't I? Who could think differently? Well, the Chinese
person, an Iranian. And so if this is the problem with remaining in the world realm of the abstract,
and so if we make it particular and civilizational, it also means that we actually have to draw
boundaries, right? It actually means that we have to define where it started and where it stops.
And the range that we have within that is where we are. And so now we actually don't need to
find ourselves groping in the dark for what hierarchy should look like. You are right. I mean,
the hierarchy will be based ultimately on either corruption or competence. That sounds absolutely
correct. And they are in contradiction. I agree with that. But also, there's a way of being
competently corrupt that I think someone like Vladimir Putin actually deeply embodies. He's
obviously a very competent guy, but obviously he's an evil villain. So they aren't mutually exclusive,
even though they're in contradiction. But we don't value having a competent villain in charge.
We value having someone who might be actually incompetent, but at least they're virtuous in
charge. That would be preferable because of our cultural situation. And so once we have this sort
of continuum that we can see ourselves within and situated in the human experience in a time,
in a place, then I don't know if we can call that liberalism, because as you said, liberalism is
this body of ideas. But it is definitely a product of this time and space. If you are to trace the
genesis of liberalism, and Stephen Hicks just says, well, it begins in England. And there's a reason
for that. Because what, and this is what Michael Oakshaw's perspective was, was just the distillation
of the English political tradition. And it is through these political traditions that we could
just carry on, as we do, intuitively and instinctively. Because you are right. I mean, like
I said, we can rationalize why these things are good. But the rationalization will really be for
people like us and those foreigners who agree with us. And so now I've had to make a distinction
between these people and those people. And that's more realistic than having the abstract set of
ideas. I'm not even sure where I'm going with this point, really. But it feels important to sort of
take the ideas out of space, the abstract, the realm of the forms, and put them in the world.
This is where they belong. And this is who they belong to. And this is why they belong to these
people. And you are right. They came into being for a reason because of royal oppression against
the peasantry and against the nobles. The argument was, well, God has mandated this. Well, we'll see.
We'll see who's right arm mandates it, who God is really with on that case. And it turns out
that it was actually with the people, with the lower orders, and not just with the king. And
this had happened a few times, actually. And eventually, the king gets his head cut off
until we get to this negotiated settlement, effectively, that becomes the sort of English
and then American constitutional system. But that is the product of layers and layers and layers of
tradition and experience and personal negotiation between people. And so this is why I return to
the kind of mythological view of this thing. It's not just something we can abstract away,
and then we can't give liberalism to Afghanistan. And they don't have the institutions,
they don't have the traditions, they don't have the thoughts in their head, the instincts
to make this thing work. It's just, it's a false oath. It's not their mythology.
But so... Just one interjection.
When you bring up the mythological and the sentimental, it's not just a negative,
it's not just romance, it's not just faith. We can see like Hegel embarked on a project and
J.R.R. Tolkien embarked on a project, a massive project that have stood this test of time and
influenced huge amounts of genre. But they were both operating probably mythologically,
both oriented or dealing with the same kind of imaginal forms. But Hegel abstracted them into
ideas. Tolkien put some ideas in there, but nested them in character. So he oriented his
imagination differently than Hegel. So the Gnostic tradition, I think, is a type of creativity.
It's a type of Western man, a man who is trying to achieve godhood. And that project is incredibly
ambitious project and will drive people to do great things. Now those great things might not
be good, but those ambitious people, that prompt, become god, will create great things, terrible
things too. And that's like the tolerance of sociopaths question. How much do you tolerate
sociopaths because they'll create, say, industries by doing horrible things that benefit us all
massively even though they do massive evil in the process of doing it? I mean, that's a hard question.
But seeing that that type, the Gnostic type, is always like in dialogue, has always been creating
artistic works alongside these other types of artistic works, poetry and storytelling that
expand the tradition. I just, I think that there's a dialogue there.
Artistic is a strong word there for the Gnostics, in my opinion. I don't feel like there's very
much art going on there. But I mean, this is a story in Genesis. Genesis chapter three is about
this. So this is a human dialogue that's not going away. Definitely not going away. But what I'm
worried about with this contingency of culture, I do agree, we're not going to just take liberalism
and plop it down in Afghanistan and it's going to take off. It would have to grow there, right?
It would have to be that the idea is underneath it, land and people in the right way and they
articulate it in their own contingent context, et cetera. And it has to grow and flourish and
whatever on its own and kind of grow in and through that context. I don't disagree with that. But I
will be as culturally chauvinistic as I have to be about this particular tradition. And I don't
think it's just a product of the fact that I happen to live in it and happen to think this way
and happen to have been born into a tradition that thinks this way. I look around the world
and as Donald Trump rightly pointed out, many whole countries. And I see that there are better
and worse answers to these questions of how human beings, which I do not think are, despite our
cultural differences, despite our different histories, I do not think that we're functionally
that different as organisms as that animal side. If we're going to ground our future political
projects in the human, I don't believe in universal man, but I do believe that the
boundary of that which is human as a collection is a bounded set. There's a
gulf between that set and the set of chimpanzees that is enormous. It's not a small difference.
It is a constrained system that defines what it is to be human and the similarities within that
does define kind of a imaginary and abstract, yes, universal concept of human. But whatever
that boils down to, it seems to me literally not just intuitive or obvious or anything,
but just evidentiary over the past 300 years that where these values we can say are these
English values or as Stephen Hicks often frames it, the English enlightenment or Scottish
enlightenment, even as a Southerner, I'm United States, I'm just kidding, my family is from New York,
but mostly actually my family history is partly English and Scottish. It's a little more British
highly than that. I've got some German in me too, watch out, the bugs are coming for you. But I've
got this whole view that this English enlightenment tapped into fundamentally human values that
somehow attached to what Sam Harris kind of comically called human flourishing and moral
landscape 15 years ago or whatever. I want to reclaim the term human flourishing. I think
that's a perfectly noble goal. Right. But the thing is, I don't think that these ideas are,
I don't go as far into the postmodern condition as to accept that this is a totally contingent
cultural phenomenon that these ideas worked. These ideas did work because these ideas in
this culture because they grew out of this culture. Right. And so there's that aspect of it. But where
these ideas have been successfully implemented in other places, they have led to similar levels
of flourishing. Like I said, when I go to China, you have people who desire to be ruled. You have
those people in America too. I talked to those people. They're all over that. My friend, for
example, who had master's degrees coming out of his butthole, but he couldn't get a job and he's
wants women to rule over him and whip him or whatever hell he wants. I don't know.
Some weird shit. Just a brief interjection. It's not just the export of the ideas,
but it's the virtues too. You can't just have liberal ideas without some sort of Christian virtue.
Well, I don't know that it has to necessarily be, I mean, I'm not going to say it has to be
humility, patience. Every time that you guys bring up a virtue, it's a Christian virtue.
Every single virtue that you guys give up is canonized.
I would also go further and say that this isn't contingent either. I'd say that Christianity
codified those virtues extraordinarily well in a cohesive system that's extremely pro-social.
But these, I think, again, Aristotle wasn't a Christian. These are human virtues.
No, but the Christians were very influenced by Aristotle.
Well, of course they were. They took that from him. He didn't take that from them.
So just as a quick interjection, because I find this fascinating because I wonder
if this isn't the cultural difference between me as an Englishman and you as Americans, right?
Because, no, no, I'm serious about this because Americans do have a habit of seeing themselves
as universal men because America is, of course, the most successful project of liberalism.
And it's done phenomenally well because historically, it was very rooted in the English
tradition of liberalism, which is, as Oakshott put it, just the distillation of English political
practice into theory. But of course, if you've got a bunch of people who have been born and raised
as Englishmen and then calling themselves Americans but still having the common law,
still having these values of accountability and justice and political decentralization,
all of the traditional values of England just replicated on the American continent,
then it makes sense that that would work because, of course, to the people, and this goes down to
the way the language is constructed, the kind of institutions we have, the family values that we
share and that you're raised with, these things are radically different in Britain than they are
literally just a hundred miles away in France. France has a totally different set of social
values to the English. And it's actually remarkable. And the Germans have a totally,
totally different set of intellectual values to the English. And then that's not even talking
about what the Italians, the Spanish and the Greeks are like. And so it's actually kind of
crazy that I had a conversation with a Greek friend of mine the other day. And I was like,
mate, if your cousin drove to your house and he was in a stolen car and you recognized the car
and someone when he worked makes cars, would you tell the police and say, no, that's crazy,
right? You would tell the police, right? I would tell the police, you have to tell the police.
But that's because we have literally got radically different social values. He would see that as a
form of betraying his cousin. I would see that as a form of betraying the rule of law entirely
in this country, right? I would know you, you, you have committed a crime, you have not been
virtuous, you have not done the right thing. And I would be doing the right thing by contacting
the police and it would be right that you be punished for your theft. That's a very much
an English set of values. That's not something that they value in Greece, right? Probably not
in America, I don't know, right? That's not, no, like, bro, you should probably go give that back.
Like you'd have a conversation with your cousin, but you sure as hell wouldn't go around your
cousin out. Well, if he was intransigent about it, you know, maybe, I think you probably should.
But the, the, the point is though, the American perspective has always homogenized Europe.
Although it's because of the nation of immigrants.
No, no, it's not just that. I think it's the remoteness from Europe as well.
That helps.
And, and the, it's like our best thing.
Well, when you're a lot closer, you start to gain a better understanding of actually
how particular and parochial our value system is. I mean, for example, the English have never,
as a culture, have never been particularly haunted by the ghost of Faust, right? Whereas the Germans,
and he's been mentioning many Germans in this, they're deeply riddled by it. They, they, they
don't know what to do about this concept. But there's never been a problem with the English,
because the English actually have always been quite humble in this idea that actually, of course,
God's there. And of course, we're not gods. Of course, you just look at what's in front of your
face and you do the best you can with what you have. Because the English, I spoke to a German
professor a while ago, he was like, well, you're, you're intellectually lazy. And it's like,
yeah, that's, that's true. That is actually quite true. We're not stupid. We're just intellectually
lazy. The Germans are not intellectually lazy, though. And this is one of the problems with
Kant. Like if you look at what Kant is trying to do, he's essentially trying to formulate
a technique for looking into the mind of God and say, right, what is a categorical moral imperative?
Only God can set a categorical moral imperative. That's nonsense. No one, no human being could
possibly do that. But of course, it didn't come out of the mind of an Englishman. It came out of
the mind of a German. And I wonder if this Faustian spirit is the Gnostic element that is running
through this. And so when we see this, this exchange of our souls in exchange for unlimited
wisdom and power, well, this is essentially what the transgender movement is asking for.
Yes, yes, yes. Like we want to be able to do it. And so you can see the Faustian German spirit
being embodied in this movement, but it's very alien to the English perspective. And of course,
America being an English country means that it is, I think the parasite that you were trying to
describe earlier that you, you know, you were saying that this is, and so, but when you put it in
this perspective, you can actually name where it's come from. You can name the people, you can name,
it's not just an abstract thing. But then it means that you have to kind of police your own
boundaries, right? You have to actually, we should do things in the English way because this is what
we feel is right. This is our prejudice. Or you can, you can do a little empirical if you look
at how these different cultures, let's say France, Germany and Britain, how they scaled
when they were exported to other places or when America was started. Like what, which traditions
from Europe stabilized at scale and the English stabilized at scale and maybe the Catholic,
hold on, but... But this thing, which traditions from Europe? There is no Europe, really. That's
the thing that like half of, well, more than half of the Americas is Spanish or Portuguese.
And that is utterly alien. You know, that's what I'm saying. That's what I'm saying. So something
in the Spanish tradition scaled and was able to stable, I mean, more or less, they have a lot of
problems with Communism, stuff like that. Tyranny. But... Tyranny scaled. And something was unique
about the way that the English tradition scaled and was, you know, it's in Australia, it's in
Canada, it's here, right? So maybe Germany can't scale, but it can scale within the English,
right? Maybe, right? Do you see what I'm saying? Like the body politic?
The Germans should be in charge of kitchens. They shouldn't be in charge of countries,
because German food is wonderful and German governance is diabolical.
The other way around, of course, applies to England, right? English kitchens are terrible,
but again, English governance is wonderful. And this is what we're trying to achieve with
Magna Carta, with the American Constitution, with liberalism in and of itself as a project.
But this means we have to be able to identify what is not
what we're looking for. And actually, you know, now I've been able to bifurcate these things,
say, right, okay, you are right. It's not just the Enlightenment as one giant thing.
There are lots of different places where Enlightenment's were going on. And, you know,
cross-pollination of ideas comes back and forward. And we are suffering from one of these
cross-pollinations at the moment.
Right. French and German cross-pollinating into English and Scottish.
Absolutely.
And this is David Stocking's point.
Correct. And this is against Stephen Hicks, where he's talking about Germans and bad Germans,
and more bad Germans, is like the title of one of his chapters. If you haven't read into the
Swabian pietist movement, which was a southern German mysticism movement, that it's like,
within the broad conception of Europe, it's like the longest
holdout in mysticism as the modern era kind of persisted. And this is,
Hegel was trained at one of their seminaries. He was trained in the so-called Lutheran.
Yeah. So the Swabia, you know, the southern portion there of Germany,
Swabia held out with some occult magic for a very long time, well into the 19th century,
well into the 19th century. And that's where a lot of these bad Germans and more bad Germans
happened to come from. But the influence there of mysticism was much more profound than you had
in England. That's probably why this spirit of Faust, and of course, Gritha was one of the
characters who was swept up in all of this. Just a quick thing there. England, in this sort of
time period, suffering dramatically from Puritanism. Yes, burning the witches.
Opposite problem. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Yeah. And so what you actually, if you haven't looked
into the Swabian pietist thing. No, I'm going to put it in the brows of it.
A lot of these so-called Germans and bad Germans, you want to look up a character by the name of
Friedrich Oettinger. I can't ever say his name. It's O-E-T-I-N-G-E-R, right? Oettinger,
or it's O with a frickin' umlaut, which nobody can pronounce except Germans.
Yeah. And so this guy is one of, he's a teacher of Hegel. This is a very important character
and understanding. Also, another kind of German mystic much earlier is Jacob Boma,
which is B-O with an umlaut, H-M-E. These characters are extremely influential in the
progress of this broad German enlightenment, which is where you're getting this kind of
Kantian thought, you're getting this kind of Hegelian and Marxist thought. A difference with
American culture to British culture, besides the fact of this Greek cousin loyalty thing, which
we have a surprising streak of, kind of the fundamental American value if I had to kind of
boil it all down. Just a quick thing there. I mean, we probably do here, but I think that
if you approached it as a philosophical conundrum, almost every English person would say,
well, of course you should tell the police. When I listen to your accent, I hear you say that,
but if you were speaking cockney, I don't think you would. Yeah, well, that's what I'm trying to
have at home. I think they would concede that that is the value that they know that they should
uphold. Whether they do or not is a totally different question. Obviously, not everyone
here is saying or anything. Well, the thing in America, when I said we're a nation of immigrants
a moment ago, is the fundamental American value is, oh, you're an American? Great, get a job.
Like, which is, I don't give a shit about you, do something productive.
And that's kind of what binds us all together. It doesn't matter if you're Muslim,
it doesn't matter if you're Buddhist, it doesn't matter if you're white, it doesn't matter if you're
black, you're here, you're legal. Great. Shut the hell up and get a job. Like, that's,
you know, we, that's deep, isn't it? It is. It enables us. It also enables us, though, to,
as I said to somebody the other day, where some intersectional shit was on Twitter and I just
replied kind of glibly. And I said, can we just get back to a time when I could like people in
particular and dislike people in general? Yeah. Yeah. And I think like, I want to like cool
people in particular because I got to know them and I got to hear their ideas. But this is that
rampant like, shut up, get a job, do something productive, be somebody. And also you're an
individual and that's what I'm going to respect in you is what you've done, not where you came
from, not what, not even what your traditions are. Oh yeah, these are your traditions. Cool.
Let's have a barbecue and find out about them or whatever. Let's hang out. Do your,
do your fest. Let's come. Let's all have like Greek day or whatever. Whatever happens to be,
doesn't matter. But it's like, at the end of the day, though, if you're an American, it's like,
shut up and get a job. What are you doing? That's our value. Yeah, this is the American tradition.
This is, which is why it taps into that idea that there is something that's not
the exact idea of the universal man. It's definitely not universal. This is not how
Italians think, right? Unless they come to America and they get told to shut up and get a job.
No, no, no. They'll do it because they're forced to do it. But that's not the wellspring of their
culture. No, I understand. I understand. It is the wellspring of English culture, right? It is.
Exactly here. Get a job. Stop being a loafer. Other people, you know, don't rely on them. They
should rely on you. You know, you should do your part for the rest of the community rather than
have them do their part for you. These are very parochial values. That's the thing.
The product and work ethic, yes. Yeah, these are very parochial values. And so this is the,
this is the problem, I think, inherent in liberalism is if, because now we're talking
about things in a totally different way, right? Instead of constructing an abstract set of
ideas that connect together in a certain way and suggesting that this could be universalized.
Now we're talking in a particular way and saying, look, we're actually, we exist in relation
to other groups of people. Essentially, you're speaking in a more Europeanized way, right?
Because I think the American project being a propositional nation actually contains kind of
this problem where you guys fall into abstractions. Whereas in Europe, we are not propositional
nations. And so we are used to the tradition, the long accumulated acclimate, long
accumulator, cultural baggage that we've had with one another, right? I know what a Scott
is going to say to me. I know what a Frenchman is going to say to me. I lived in Germany for eight
years, right? I know, I know every German thinks before they open their mouth, right? Because
they are all the same in many different ways. But they're also all very different to what the
average person in England is like, right? And they're all lovely, by the way. I've never met a
German I didn't like. But that's because I never put them in charge of the country.
And I swear to God, I'll go to my grave believing this. But you realize that these differences
are really important and they matter and they are tangible. And what's more is you begin to
build a relationship with the differences. And it's probably the same with Americans and Mexicans
actually. Because I mean, I personally don't view Mexicans as Americans. The blacks are Americans,
the whites are Americans. The Mexicans are not Americans, they're Mexicans. And it's because
they come from the inquisitorial legal system. They come from the Mediterranean family system.
They come from a different religion. They speak a different language.
Oh, by Mexican, you mean the Latinx? No, no, just Mexicans.
People from Mexico are not Americans. They are Mexicans, right?
You said American in front of Americans who mean the United States and we got confused.
You meant Americans like American continents. Okay, we're clarifying.
No, no, I mean like people from the United States, right?
Mexicans from the United States. No, no. Mexicans have a different legal system.
They have a different family structure. They have a different religion and a different language.
Correct. In Europe, you would never call that, you know, you like that, you're essentially saying
that these are Spanish people, right? Mexicans are Spanish people. You're English people.
You're not the same. They're not the same. They're different.
Okay, I see what you're saying. Yes.
And so it's, so when, you know, when they're like, Oh, Mexican Americans, I know you're just
Mexicans who live in America. You're not Mexican Americans.
Well, see, you're, we have a completely different way of thinking about America.
And we have a problem with the border, you know, but we have so much cultural mixing.
We don't think of America as white Anglo-Saxon European. That's just one strain.
I'm not, right?
It's, it's, see, now you are abstracting into a category already there, right?
Because what I'm talking about is America is so abstract. That's the problem with America.
We're, we're not as proquel as you guys.
No, no, it is. That's exactly the problem. And it's because America is a propositional
enlightenment nation that's built on liberal, liberalism itself, liberal philosophy. And so,
but there is a thing that other people outside of America recognize as an American,
and it doesn't mean white. It means American. And that doesn't mean Mexican, right? Like,
I don't know how to describe it. Like, like I said, the blacks are Americans,
but also the whites are Americans. And there are, you know, people who are born and raised America
in American customs and traditions, who have never been in another country who are not black
or white, but are American, right? But people who move to America from another country and like,
yeah, I just want to get a job and, you know, work hard and make money. That's not enough to
make them. No, no, no, I agree. I agree. I agree. Okay. I know what you're saying now.
Yeah. Yes. Yes. That is true. There is a cult. There is a distinct cultural value,
cultural suite of values that defines that which is American.
But also, it's not just the values. It's about how you are raised. It's about the communities
you're raising. No, I hear you. The customs, you know, the character. Yeah, I agree. I agree.
The one thing that America has this that Europe doesn't have, and I think it's actually the
lack of this is kind of crippling Europe at the moment, is this incorporative ideology
that is becoming an American, right? We don't have that. That's exactly what I was wanting to
suggest off of that is, yeah, because you can have that character, whether they come from Mexico
or they come from China, whether they come from, I guess, your primitive island, and they can become
American. They can kind of adopt that suite. They can join the tribe.
Well, yes, in a sense, but Benjamin had a wonderful point, though, when we look at how,
what happens empirically when these particular sets of values get exported,
formerly by empire, but not as much in the literal, not in the literal sense by empire,
by anybody but China anymore. But we have these kind of weird economic empires and so on. We
thought, allegedly, we thought we could transform China into a kind of more Western liberal nation
by exporting business values, which they seem to have judoed on us. Turns out we didn't study our
martial arts before we went to the center of martial arts. They acted Chinese about it.
A little bit, or yeah, among others. That's not an insult. That's just an observation.
I mean, there's more to it than this, but the fact of the matter is that when we export these
values, we see improvements. And that doesn't take away from somebody like in America. I don't see
anything that takes away from your ability to be German or Mexican or whatever as you become American,
which is a very interesting thing. Having known people from all over or from all different
backgrounds, who at the, I don't know how many Iraqis, for example, that I've met, who become
American, they come, they immigrate, they go through naturalization, they become legal citizens.
And so you have these guys, their accent never goes away, their kind of cultural
demeanor doesn't change because they were raised in these things. And yet, they're walking down
the street literally in a suit made of American flags, like waving an American flag, shouting
about the 4th of July, quoting Thomas Jefferson. And there's something about this where they become
uniquely Iraqi and American at the same time. And that in corporate development, and I think
you're right, it is crippling Europe. And it's, I think, why you guys have fought with each other
the way that you have so much. And America, I think, was founded in part, looking over at you
guys and being like, not you specifically as in English. No, no, no, you're up broadly with the UK
kind of as an appendage of that. I know we don't get too much into whether or not it's European.
And saying like, not this way, American man, you know, let's let's try a different path.
And that's why I said that, you know, oh, you're here, you're legal, get a job,
become such a constitutive thing for what it means to be American. And it's also,
it's not with the like the Australian tall poppy, keep your head down, mate, kind of attitude.
But there is a certain like, it's, it's much more New York City, shut the fuck up,
you know, kind of attitude in America of kind of a humility. Unlike, again, it's in Australia,
they cut each other down and nobody's allowed to be cool at all. Yeah, I know you. Yeah, I've been
to your island. But we don't, it's about knowing your place, though, right? And this, this is,
this is the difference between the rest of the Anglo sphere in America. But the, this
Incorporative Ideology is a remarkable technology. But I think it's only possible because America
is an explicitly propositional nation. And so what, what, what I'm, what I mean, then, is
essentially America has a moral responsibility never to build a McDonald's anywhere other than
America, right? Because what you're doing is you're not being sensitive to the fact that
actually this is an intrusive cultural institution that begins to subvert and undermine
other native cultures that are not based on this kind of customary traditional propositionalism
that is not prepared to deal with it either. Because why would you have thought about this
in any way, shape or form, right? So it America can't help but undermine the traditions of other
countries all over the world. And the only reason I think that plays like China are kind of immune
to it is because they're essentially affected by the Germans. They're, they're not into it by the
way. Well, yeah, yeah, sure. But like, you should go and you should see why they have any antibodies
then is because they are, they're currently occupied by German ideology, you know, and I agree with
the German ideology part there. Yeah, it's, it's, but it is, you know, it was invented by a German.
And so it's, that's the only reason they can resist it in any way or, or shape it to their
own ends. And so, I mean, they covet it and they dress like they covet it and don't know how to
covet it correctly. It's not as bad now as it's matured a little. The Nouveau Rich in China,
the first times I went, I mean, it was, you know, the most garish, you know, you pick whichever
brand Gucci, I don't even know my brands that you're supposed to be all the big ones, right?
They're obnoxious symbols, the G's and the D's and the things and the whatever.
We're not supposed to mention the Balenciaga one anymore. Every piece of clothing on a person
was a different one of them with the brand logo as large as it can possibly be. It's like a guy
wearing a jacket that's a giant Ferrari with like Lamborghini pants, like to show off how he's part
of all the big expensive brands and like everybody was like that. And it's toned down now. I mean,
just the most obnoxious kind of, and it was a phenomenon of being the Nouveau Rich phenomenon
and the covetousness of, of the West. And they have this weird, like, exploitative
ass, like mentality about it. But at the same time, they also, it's like, if you're a white American
in China, they worship you and use you at the same time and hate you at the same time. It's a
really weird phenomenon to kind of experience. You're getting major positive and negative racism
at the same time against you, for sure. Yeah. My sister worked in South Korea for a while,
and she had a friend over there who he had a beard and Koreans would just come up to the
street and just touch his face. That's happened to me in China. Yeah. And I was just like,
that is horrific. You know, I can't imagine strangers just coming up and touching my face.
They'll come up with a cell phone right in your face. Yeah. I mean, all kinds of really strange
things. I mean, on the more fun side, like pretty girls will just run up to you and take selfies
with you for no reason. Yeah. But this, but this is what I mean when essentially we have to make
the Americans understand they are parochial and their view of mankind as universal is tied to the
liberalism and it's also damaging other cultures, right? But I don't, I don't, as maybe it's my
Americanness, I just don't see a problem. Well, there's the flip side with wellness. No, no, no,
that is, of course you don't, because it's what you're used to. It's what you are familiar with.
It's what you expect, right? But I'm, I've, this, this is what the return guys are talking about,
but not articulating it well enough. It's, it's this kind of cultural imperialism that
seems justified when you say, well, we have a better culture, but you've got to remember that
everyone thinks they have a better culture. And what you really have is just more power,
right? Because if it was the other way, there'd be like, well, my Latvian culture is just better
than your American culture. That's why I get to impose on you. And so it's actually not
sentimental in any way. It's actually now rationalistic. And actually, the way that the,
the European powers have been have forced us into sentimental relationships with one another,
because of the lack of over single power domination of the continent. Actually, if you look at the
European nations, they're all roughly the same size, you know, they're at least all comparable.
And so it's kind of forced us to have some form of respect for that other culture that we don't,
and so we, we've got a saying in, in England is when in Rome, you do as the Romans do,
but that's not something Americans believe. And it's destroying civilizations. And so it's this,
but I genuinely think it's tied to the, the American liberal experience of the world,
thinking of themselves as universal men and anyone can come and be an American,
actually, no, I don't really think that's true. And also, I think that that concept is being
exported in a damaging way to other people. And so I think that I think a lot of it is why
there's a fundamental resentment against America, because I like, I like loads of Americans,
I like loads of Americans. But also, I can see why a lot of people don't like Americans, you know,
and so, I mean, it's probably because I'm English, and therefore we've got very, very,
almost harmonious values and sense of humor, and I'm used to American culture. And so,
yeah, I get along really great with Americans. But I do understand the complaints against America.
I think that those vaguely sympathetic. Those complaints are actually working themselves
out within America. When we have the democratic establishment, the deep state, whatever it is,
they think that they're superior, that their values are universal, and they despise the parochial
Americans. And they're worlds apart. And so one of the tensions between the
left and the right in our country, which we project out of the world, is that universalizing
all-consuming bureaucratic mindset, and then this like localized red state-ish,
more rural uniqueness that you are explaining as America at large is doing the rest of the world.
No, and this is why I'm so totally in support of like the MAGA movement, you know, not so much
Trump himself, but the people that he is representing. These are the sort of people that
in Europe, I would recognize as just my countrymen, you know, they're just my fellow Englishmen.
And these are the people that I don't want to see the left destroy. You know, the left will
destroy this unique traditional culture, and that's what it is. And that's what we have in
Europe. And so we have to get out of the mindset of rationalistic universalism to be able to appreciate
that that's there. Now, that's not to undo any of what we were talking about at the beginning of
this conversation, because honestly, I agreed with almost all of it. I think you'll agree with
the next thing I'll say, but carry on. Okay. We need to be able to have a rational perspective
on the world, obviously. But I think that should include the appreciation for the
native traditional cultures that we have. See, so I don't think that the left has a
rational universalist perspective whatsoever. I think they have a Gnostic universalist perspective,
which is they know better and everybody has to be that. And I don't feel like that's actually
fundamentally American at all. I don't think Americans, no, it's not at all think. Yeah,
it is German. That's right. They have a systematic philosophy. That's why they
shouldn't be heads of states ever. You can go to your grave. I'll go with you, maybe not to your
grave, but in agreement, it'll be a group grave, I'm sure. We can, we can, we're all gonna die on
some hill, some time. We can, yeah, we can tell them on Louise right off the side of that one
together, holding hands, the whole thing. But it is, but that's, and again, this is that Swabian
pietist thing, because it so informs what we see as German philosophy, because the German systematic
philosophies grew largely out of that, which was a Gnostic kind of attempt to fuse Gnosticism and
the kind of emerging enlightenment science and the emerging enlightenment philosophy
in the German context. So I hear what you're saying. I think that these things should be
allowed to play out organically. If that, I don't think that destroys, it does damage or transform
or change traditional cultures, but I don't think it destroys societies or even cultures. I think
it allows them to change with time and if you want to be contingent about it with the
contingent circumstances of that they find themselves in the times and places and communication
modes that they have. That's not a problem, but it's when you have this imperialistic
that I have a problem with. So let me stop you there because
this again, feels like an opinion that is centered in the sort of rational liberal perspective.
I'm not trying to just constantly pull you up on it, but
traditional cultures do change over time. The great example of that was Queen Elizabeth's funeral,
where you could see traditional uniforms and costumes from each era of Britain's history
marching in procession. It's kind of preposterous in a way, but it's also a testament to what we
have been through as a country. It's not that traditional cultures don't change.
The problem is that the American rationalism that I agree is infected with German Gnosticism,
I totally agree, but this is being exported around the world and it's kind of liquefying
these cultures. So it becomes impossible to have a true and sincere commitment to
the traditional way of life in that place. I think actually it is a problem and it is
kind of anti-human because at least one thing we can say about the traditional cultures is
they're authentically human. They're just that kind of human. There are lots of kinds of human,
but it's authentically a human experience. This is where I don't go with you.
Which is fine. We don't have to agree obviously, but this is where I don't go with you.
I just impressed that again, we can call it the English side and the German side or whatever
we want to call it, but the Gnostic aspect is not necessarily woven thoroughly through what it means
to be American or liberal. It is a thing that has grown up with it and is parasitic upon it.
And I think that our values of universalism as we were talking about earlier created an opening
by which say through critical race theory and the literally Marxist perversions of civil rights
that have created this kind of monstrosity. I think that we can make it very evident that this
German idealism or this Gnosticism by asking where does it propagate? Where does it scale?
It scales within bureaucracies specifically, which means corporations, which means
nominally efficient systems and it propagates in media, it propagates in colleges too.
And if we see that wherever these ideas are transmitted, they're probably transmitted through
business, through forms of business, through forms of interaction and a culture. And what they blend,
it is a type of person. The cubicle man is a type of person. It's not a type of person,
but he's thinking in a universalized form. He's thinking in terms of bureaucracies,
thinking in terms of what did you say? Abstractions.
Abstractions by just chopping people down into a little functionary but fungible. He just thinks
in that way. And that way of thinking is, again, it's very good at doing certain things.
But it also propagates, I think Carl's critique is that it puts every individual
into a blender and it erodes societies. But when we go back to the question that you posed at
the beginning, James, about there's this beast that we have to defeat, if you do want to tie it
to Gnosticism and then see where Gnosticism propagates through the systems or the cultures,
then we can see how to create cultures or systems, corporations, and states that are immune to it
that still have the same kind of functionality, that still train people, that still inform people,
and that still rule people, but are still immune to that whatever this mind virus is.
I mean, it attaches to centralization of power and monopoly is what it attaches to
extraordinarily efficiently. And so whatever you're looking forward to, and I actually think that one
of the reasons besides this kind of civil right parasitism that we cannot ignore, it cannibalized
civil rights movements from within, became very strong and emerged as kind of a destructive
dragon that's burning down societies. The woke problem, I mean specifically with the identity
politics, what I've referred to as identity Marxism more specifically, it cannibalizes or it attaches
to, I should say, to centralized power and monopoly. So we have to be thinking in terms of, I think
that other than just that, that's where I was going with it, sorry, I think that one of the main
things that has happened is that because of the rapid changes that came, structurally speaking,
in every culture, this is not even a cultural argument, due to the rapid transformation of
technological communications technology in particular, but also, so that's big tech,
basically, but also financial technology, these two sectors of the economy rapidly changed,
rapidly gained the kind of monopolistic power, because they were ahead of whether it's legislation,
whether it's out of culture, they were ahead in their developments of everything else.
They gained this kind of power, I was thinking about this yesterday, that it's the kind of power
that corrupt or evil governments covet, or maybe we should just be more realistic and say that all
governments covet. They covet the kind of power that the tech industry and the financial industry
were able to accrue over the past 20 years due to technological transformation that we haven't
been able to answer yet. What does it look like going forward? I think that the liberal project
of decentralization of power that nobody deserves political authority, so we're going to
decentralize that. Nobody gets to answer questions, does the final say, well, this is just how we do
shit around here. Nope, we're going to ask the question. I think that while that does have a
corrosive or a subversive or a acidic dissolving kind of effect, or can, it also prevents the
ability for this thing to take over, but the reason that it was able to take over was because
new technologies emerged. I think I've hit it. I think I've hit it. You are right. There is a
parasite. You are absolutely right, because the distinction, I think, should be made between
English and French liberalism, because English liberalism is built on negative rights, of course.
What the king can't do to you, and this, of course, comes from the medieval tradition of
essentially the Anglo-Saxons fighting against the Norman occupiers. That manifests explicitly
in negative rights. However, the French view of liberalism, as we know as Rousseau, manifests in
a series of positive rights. In fact, it's almost an entirely positivistic doctrine when you get down
to the base of it. You can literally see this in the formulation between Locke and Rousseau,
whereas Locke thought we sacrificed a portion of our natural rights to protect the rest
through the creation of a government, which, of course, then is subject to negative
behaviors, negative restraints. Rousseau believed we exchanged our natural rights for civil rights,
and that's a positive perspective on rights rather than a negative one. That strikes me as the
parasite itself. The problem, though, is that that really inflames 20th-century civil rights
doctrines, because essentially the Civil Rights Act would have to be one of those key points where
you point to and say, look, that's the parasite. It has to be grounded back in the very English
declaration that Thomas Jefferson wrote down and following Locke, of course, and then tried to live
up to and fail that they exploit. It has to be grounded correctly. I think this is where, not
that I'm a huge fan of Caldwell's book, The Age of Entitlement. I do like it. I think it's an
important book, but where you actually see with the Civil Rights Movement that there was this
split. And in fact, the problem in the United States is we have two constitutional orders right
now, two fundamentally different, irreconcilable constitutional orders. One of them is, in fact,
an entitlement state that is this French Enlightenment or French liberal positivistic
state. I don't think that, I don't know about the Civil Rights Act themselves, but the judicial
interpretation of those that followed very rapidly, the enactment of the Great Society
with Johnson and going forward, these things explicitly took the path that he's outlining
as the Asian entitlement. And these things explicitly became the pathway by which the
virus was able to start to cannibalize the liberal tradition. And I think that this is
absolutely crucial for us to understand, to start unwinding, because now when we understand it this
way, we have one massive advantage. Not only do we get conceptual clarity, we can start to identify
unique judicial decisions that took us down the wrong road, which means that those judicial
decisions can be brought to review. We just had the huge thing with Roe v. Wade, but you start
looking at things like in universities, Bakke versus, what was it? Is it the Regents of the
University of California? You start looking at that, you start looking at employment like Duke
versus Griggs Power. I think that's what that's called. You start looking at those,
there's a handful of these cases, like kind of landmark cases. You can figure out which ones
they are, because the critical racers point to them obsessively. And you can figure out which
ones they were that took us down this path. And then those going under judicial review can actually
take, not the Civil Rights Act necessarily themselves, which could be rooted in our 14th
amendment, which can be rooted back to the Declaration of Independence. But all of the judicial
interpretation that came after those that created this second constitutional order that were,
this parasitic, pseudo constitutional order that we go under, where we are now reinterpreting what
the Constitution was intended to mean, or what law is intended to, what the civil rights laws are
intended to say. In particular, here's one of the little manipulations, protected class. So
civil rights law says that race, for example, is a protected class. That's not the same thing as
saying certain races are protected classes of individuals, right? That's a completely different
conception of what a protected class means. And when we disentangle these, we actually
can find a path out of this through means, while post liberal cultural renewal may be
a valuable project. We can find ways that are strictly within the liberal legal tradition
to unwind this mess. Where again, like we said earlier, nobody has to become a revolutionary
to get out of this. So this I think is best exemplified in the bake the cake controversy,
right? Because this seems to me to be the perfect example that the state is going to force someone
to bake a cake against their will, because it would be discriminatory for them not to.
That's the, it's such a perfect exemplification of positive rights in action. I get to force you
to do something or else, right? That's the total inversion of the English liberal tradition,
what I consider to be the proper liberal tradition, like we were trying to think of.
You see that in the conversion therapy bills too, where they took the concept of forcing somebody
to change their sexuality, being wrong to questioning somebody's gender identity to be
wrong, right? Yes. But the thing is this, what this means is that you will be opening up a space
where it will be allowable for people to be bigoted, right? Because it will be that right. You
can't tell not to be. But of course, it will also mean that you don't have the parasite saying,
right, now I've been given a license to force you to do these things. Why can't I just use
this license to force you to do a whole bunch of other things as well, right? You know, and the,
the, this is when we become the government's job to rid the world of bigotry, like, well, that's
approximately 1968. Thank you for asking. Yes, that's exactly. That's the positive
right. That's, and that is the parasite that gives itself totalitarian license over society.
Actually, I'm, I'm glad we've, we've hammered on this actually. But I mean, it does mean you will
find, you know, a shop with a Nazi side. But who cares? Well, I don't care. I'm totally liberal
about that. You know, it's like, I know I'm not going to shop there, you know, and like, I actually
am persuaded by the capitalist arguments on that. It's like, no one's going to shop there. And,
but this, and this in fact ties nicely into my theory of social moral sentiments, which is
people in the community will exert their own kind of moral pressure on that person.
They're like, oh, you're the guy with the Nazi sign. I'm not going to shop. What piece of
shit you are, you know, piss off. I'm going in just any other shop that doesn't say no blacks
or no Irish, you know, on it. And so I do think you will get this kind of moral corrective measure.
No Irish. Is that a thing where, where you're from? Do you, do you guys have that?
It was the thing where you came from. That was the thing where we are.
Okay. You guys don't have like pro Irish legislation in the 60s coming down where
you guys are forced to adore them. Okay. No, that was, you can start potatoes planning.
No, no Irish was assigned. That was an American. That was totally American.
Maybe we should have stuck with the no German. I don't know. I'm just kidding.
Yeah. But the point is you just put that on the Capitol and left it there.
But, but did it have to be legislated that the no Irish signs were taken down or did they just fall
out of favor? That, you know, that's, that's the perennial question. I mean, that literally is
the question at the heart of what was going on with the civil war. So I don't know that we're
about to answer that one. I just don't know. Well, it takes a certain amount of humility to,
well, I guess it takes a certain amount of hubris to try to shape culture to say we,
our culture are, we are no longer going to behave in this manner. And maybe sometimes
that's a good thing where you force people to behave differently. Maybe there are good uses
to put that. But once you give that power, this is the old kind of tired, or once you give that
power to the government, then they can do that. And they actually have to do that indefinitely
to maintain their cutting edge power. And that's why you have the civil rights going all the way
down into for some reason, children being exposed to grown men and women face, right?
Yes.
It's progressive in that direction.
But this, this is, this is the point though, like, I agree that it would be
far better to have a system purely of negative rights. And that would be not only sustainable.
I don't think that would actually have an acidic effect either, because it would be tolerant of
things that you didn't like. You know, you, you would have to be like, well, look,
that's just the way they do things. You'd effectively arrive at the when in Rome,
do as the Romans do perspective, you know, you let them do what their thing. And, you know,
you might not agree. But then it's, then it's a social issue. So then it's for all of us to
have a conversation about, say, well, look, actually, why are you saying that black people
can't come to your shop? That's awful. You know, how, you know, what an awfully stigmatizing thing
to do that would be, you know, and so we can agree that that would be a terrible thing to do
without having the state, essentially, and the Ben Shapiro at gunpoint. I mean, technically,
yes, you know, it's a bit hyperbolic, but yes, technically, you got to go through a lot of dorks
to get to the gun. Yeah, I know, I know, you really are more acceptable. I get some more
functionaries than dorks, but I just hate it when he compresses down everything into right now,
it's a gun. So come on, Ben, you know, come on, you know, it's an extreme way of framing it. But
but then, but then we're into the realm of being human, right? Then we're into the realm of consideration
and empathy and dealing with each other like human beings rather than having a bureaucrat
telling you what you have to do. So, you know, that's that's my view, I suppose. I don't think
I disagree with that at all. That was an amazing conversation. I have to get off to work. That's
why I'm wrapping it up. And I'm sure that you guys need to do other things, but thank you both
for blowing my mind and stretching my bladder. That was fascinating. Yeah, mine too. So I'll
link links to your work in the description, but James got new discourses and Sargon runs
Lotus Eaters. You also have YouTube, both have YouTube channels, which are fascinating work.
So yeah, they're good ones. No, they're great. If we do say so ourselves.